	

	And wherefore not ships?
	No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.

	You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?

	So you grant pasture for me.

	Not so, gentle beast:
	My lips are no common, though several they be.

	Belonging to whom?

	                  To my fortunes and me.

	Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles, agree:
	This civil war of wits were much better used
	On Navarre and his book-men; for here 'tis abused.

	If my observation, which very seldom lies,
	By the heart's still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
	Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.

	With what?

	With that which we lovers entitle affected.

	Your reason?

	Why, all his behaviors did make their retire
	To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire:
	His heart, like an agate, with your print impress'd,
	Proud with his form, in his eye pride express'd:
	His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
	Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
	All senses to that sense did make their repair,
	To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
	Methought all his senses were lock'd in his eye,
	As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
	Who, tendering their own worth from where they were glass'd,
	Did point you to buy them, along as you pass'd:
	His face's own margent did quote such amazes
	That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
	I'll give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
	An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.

	Come to our pavilion: Boyet is disposed.

	But to speak that in words which his eye hath
	disclosed.
	I only have made a mouth of his eye,
	By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.

	Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skilfully.

	He is Cupid's grandfather and learns news of him.

	Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.

	Do you hear, my mad wenches?

	No.

	What then, do you see?

	Ay, our way to be gone.

	You are too hard for me.

	Warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.

	Concolinel.

	Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years; take this key,
	give enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately
	hither: I must employ him in a letter to my love.

	Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?

	How meanest thou? brawling in French?

	No, my complete master: but to jig off a tune at
	the tongue's end, canary to it with your feet, humour
	it with turning up your eyelids, sigh a note and
	sing a note, sometime through the throat, as if you
	swallowed love with singing love, sometime through
	the nose, as if you snuffed up love by smelling
	love; with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of
	your eyes; with your arms crossed on your thin-belly
	doublet like a rabbit on a spit; or your hands in
	your pocket like a man after the old painting; and
	keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away.
	These are complements, these are humours; these
	betray nice wenches, that would be betrayed without
	these; and make them men of note--do you note
	me?--that most are affected to these.

	How hast thou purchased this experience?

	By my penny of observation.

	But O,--but O,--

	'The hobby-horse is forgot.'

	Callest thou my love 'hobby-horse'?

	No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your
	love perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your love?

	Almost I had.

	Negligent student! learn her by heart.

	By heart and in heart, boy.

	And out of heart, master: all those three I will prove.

	What wilt thou prove?

	A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon
	the instant: by heart you love her, because your
	heart cannot come by her; in heart you love her,
	because your heart is in love with her; and out of
	heart you love her, being out of heart that you
	cannot enjoy her.

	I am all these three.

	And three times as much more, and yet nothing at
	all.

	Fetch hither the swain: he must carry me a letter.

	A message well sympathized; a horse to be ambassador
	for an ass.

	Ha, ha! what sayest thou?

	Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse,
	for he is very slow-gaited. But I go.

	The way is but short: away!

	As swift as lead, sir.

	The meaning, pretty ingenious?
	Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?

	Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.

	I say lead is slow.

	You are too swift, sir, to say so:
	Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?

	Sweet smoke of rhetoric!
	He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, that's he:
	I shoot thee at the swain.

	Thump then and I flee.

	A most acute juvenal; voluble and free of grace!
	By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:
	Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
	My herald is return'd.

	A wonder, master! here's a costard broken in a shin.

	Some enigma, some riddle: come, thy l'envoy; begin.

	No enigma, no riddle, no l'envoy; no salve in the
	mail, sir: O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain! no
	l'envoy, no l'envoy; no salve, sir, but a plantain!

	By virtue, thou enforcest laughter; thy silly
	thought my spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes
	me to ridiculous smiling. O, pardon me, my stars!
	Doth the inconsiderate take salve for l'envoy, and
	the word l'envoy for a salve?

	Do the wise think them other? is not l'envoy a salve?

	No, page: it is an epilogue or discourse, to make plain
	Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
	I will example it:
	The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
	Were still at odds, being but three.
	There's the moral. Now the l'envoy.

	I will add the l'envoy. Say the moral again.

	          The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
	Were still at odds, being but three.

	          Until the goose came out of door,
	And stay'd the odds by adding four.
	Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with
	my l'envoy.
	The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
	Were still at odds, being but three.

	          Until the goose came out of door,
	Staying the odds by adding four.

	A good l'envoy, ending in the goose: would you
	desire more?

	The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, that's flat.
	Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
	To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose:
	Let me see; a fat l'envoy; ay, that's a fat goose.

	Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?

	By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
	Then call'd you for the l'envoy.

	True, and I for a plantain: thus came your
	argument in;
	Then the boy's fat l'envoy, the goose that you bought;
	And he ended the market.

	But tell me; how was there a costard broken in a shin?

	I will tell you sensibly.

	Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth: I will speak that l'envoy:
	I Costard, running out, that was safely within,
	Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.

	We will talk no more of this matter.

	Till there be more matter in the shin.

	Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.

	O, marry me to one Frances: I smell some l'envoy,
	some goose, in this.

	By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
	enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured,
	restrained, captivated, bound.

	True, true; and now you will be my purgation and let me loose.

	I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and,
	in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this:
	bear this significant

		to the country maid Jaquenetta:
	there is remuneration; for the best ward of mine
	honour is rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow.

	Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.

	My sweet ounce of man's flesh! my incony Jew!

	Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration!
	O, that's the Latin word for three farthings: three
	farthings--remuneration.--'What's the price of this
	inkle?'--'One penny.'--'No, I'll give you a
	remuneration:' why, it carries it. Remuneration!
	why, it is a fairer name than French crown. I will
	never buy and sell out of this word.

	O, my good knave Costard! exceedingly well met.

	Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man
	buy for a remuneration?

	What is a remuneration?

	Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.

	Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.

	I thank your worship: God be wi' you!

	Stay, slave; I must employ thee:
	As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
	Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.

	When would you have it done, sir?

	This afternoon.

	Well, I will do it, sir: fare you well.

	Thou knowest not what it is.

	I shall know, sir, when I have done it.

	Why, villain, thou must know first.

	I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.

	It must be done this afternoon.
	Hark, slave, it is but this:
	The princess comes to hunt here in the park,
	And in her train there is a gentle lady;
	When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
	And Rosaline they call her: ask for her;
	And to her white hand see thou do commend
	This seal'd-up counsel. There's thy guerdon; go.

	Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration,
	a'leven-pence farthing better: most sweet gardon! I
	will do it sir, in print. Gardon! Remuneration!

	And I, forsooth, in love! I, that have been love's whip;
	A very beadle to a humorous sigh;
	A critic, nay, a night-watch constable;
	A domineering pedant o'er the boy;
	Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
	This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy;
	This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid;
	Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
	The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
	Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
	Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
	Sole imperator and great general
	Of trotting 'paritors:--O my little heart:--
	And I to be a corporal of his field,
	And wear his colours like a tumbler's hoop!
	What, I! I love! I sue! I seek a wife!
	A woman, that is like a German clock,
	Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
	And never going aright, being a watch,
	But being watch'd that it may still go right!
	Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all;
	And, among three, to love the worst of all;
	A wightly wanton with a velvet brow,
	With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes;
	Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed
	Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard:
	And I to sigh for her! to watch for her!
	To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague
	That Cupid will impose for my neglect
	Of his almighty dreadful little might.
	Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan:
	Some men must love my lady and some Joan.

	Was that the king, that spurred his horse so hard
	Against the steep uprising of the hill?

	I know not; but I think it was not he.

	Whoe'er a' was, a' show'd a mounting mind.
	Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch:
	On Saturday we will return to France.
	Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
	That we must stand and play the murderer in?

	Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice;
	A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.

	I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
	And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoot.

	Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.

	What, what? first praise me and again say no?
	O short-lived pride! Not fair? alack for woe!

	Yes, madam, fair.

	                  Nay, never paint me now:
	Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
	Here, good my glass, take this for telling true:
	Fair payment for foul words is more than due.

	Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.

	See see, my beauty will be saved by merit!
	O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
	A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
	But come, the bow: now mercy goes to kill,
	And shooting well is then accounted ill.
	Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
	Not wounding, pity would not let me do't;
	If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
	That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
	And out of question so it is sometimes,
	Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
	When, for fame's sake, for praise, an outward part,
	We bend to that the working of the heart;
	As I for praise alone now seek to spill
	The poor deer's blood, that my heart means no ill.

	Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
	Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
	Lords o'er their lords?

	Only for praise: and praise we may afford
	To any lady that subdues a lord.

	Here comes a member of the commonwealth.

	God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?

	Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have no heads.

	Which is the greatest lady, the highest?

	The thickest and the tallest.

	The thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is truth.
	An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
	One o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit.
	Are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.

	What's your will, sir? what's your will?

	I have a letter from Monsieur Biron to one Lady Rosaline.

	O, thy letter, thy letter! he's a good friend of mine:
	Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve;
	Break up this capon.

	I am bound to serve.
	This letter is mistook, it importeth none here;
	It is writ to Jaquenetta.

	We will read it, I swear.
	Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.

	'By heaven, that thou art fair, is most infallible;
	true, that thou art beauteous; truth itself, that
	thou art lovely. More fairer than fair, beautiful
	than beauteous, truer than truth itself, have
	commiseration on thy heroical vassal! The
	magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set
	eye upon the pernicious and indubitate beggar
	Zenelophon; and he it was that might rightly say,
	Veni, vidi, vici; which to annothanize in the
	vulgar,--O base and obscure vulgar!--videlicet, He
	came, saw, and overcame: he came, one; saw two;
	overcame, three. Who came? the king: why did he
	come? to see: why did he see? to overcome: to
	whom came he? to the beggar: what saw he? the
	beggar: who overcame he? the beggar. The
	conclusion is victory: on whose side? the king's.
	The captive is enriched: on whose side? the
	beggar's. The catastrophe is a nuptial: on whose
	side? the king's: no, on both in one, or one in
	both. I am the king; for so stands the comparison:
	thou the beggar; for so witnesseth thy lowliness.
	Shall I command thy love? I may: shall I enforce
	thy love? I could: shall I entreat thy love? I
	will. What shalt thou exchange for rags? robes;
	for tittles? titles; for thyself? me. Thus,
	expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot,
	my eyes on thy picture. and my heart on thy every
	part. Thine, in the dearest design of industry,

	Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
	'Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey.
	Submissive fall his princely feet before,
	And he from forage will incline to play:
	But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then?
	Food for his rage, repasture for his den.

	What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter?
	What vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better?

	I am much deceived but I remember the style.

	Else your memory is bad, going o'er it erewhile.

	This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court;
	A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
	To the prince and his bookmates.

	Thou fellow, a word:
	Who gave thee this letter?

	I told you; my lord.

	To whom shouldst thou give it?

	From my lord to my lady.

	From which lord to which lady?

	From my lord Biron, a good master of mine,
	To a lady of France that he call'd Rosaline.

	Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords, away.

	Here, sweet, put up this: 'twill be thine another day.

	Who is the suitor? who is the suitor?

	Shall I teach you to know?

	Ay, my continent of beauty.

	Why, she that bears the bow.
	Finely put off!

	My lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
	Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
	Finely put on!

	Well, then, I am the shooter.

	And who is your deer?

	If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
	Finely put on, indeed!

	You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes
	at the brow.

	But she herself is hit lower: have I hit her now?

	Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was
	a man when King Pepin of France was a little boy, as
	touching the hit it?

	So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a
	woman when Queen Guinover of Britain was a little
	wench, as touching the hit it.

	Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
	Thou canst not hit it, my good man.

	An I cannot, cannot, cannot,
	An I cannot, another can.

	By my troth, most pleasant: how both did fit it!

	A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit it.

	A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
	Let the mark have a prick in't, to mete at, if it may be.

	Wide o' the bow hand! i' faith, your hand is out.

	Indeed, a' must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the clout.

	An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.

	Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.

	Come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.

	She's too hard for you at pricks, sir: challenge her to bowl.

	I fear too much rubbing. Good night, my good owl.

	By my soul, a swain! a most simple clown!
	Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down!
	O' my troth, most sweet jests! most incony
	vulgar wit!
	When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it
	were, so fit.
	Armado o' th' one side,--O, a most dainty man!
	To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
	To see him kiss his hand! and how most sweetly a'
	will swear!
	And his page o' t' other side, that handful of wit!
	Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
	Sola, sola!

	Very reverend sport, truly; and done in the testimony
	of a good conscience.

	The deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe
	as the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in
	the ear of caelo, the sky, the welkin, the heaven;
	and anon falleth like a crab on the face of terra,
	the soil, the land, the earth.

	Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
	varied, like a scholar at the least: but, sir, I
	assure ye, it was a buck of the first head.

	Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.

	'Twas not a haud credo; 'twas a pricket.

	Most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of
	insinuation, as it were, in via, in way, of
	explication; facere, as it were, replication, or
	rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his
	inclination, after his undressed, unpolished,
	uneducated, unpruned, untrained, or rather,
	unlettered, or ratherest, unconfirmed fashion, to
	insert again my haud credo for a deer.

	I said the deer was not a haud credo; twas a pricket.

	Twice-sod simplicity, his coctus!
	O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!

	Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred
	in a book; he hath not eat paper, as it were; he
	hath not drunk ink: his intellect is not
	replenished; he is only an animal, only sensible in
	the duller parts:
	And such barren plants are set before us, that we
	thankful should be,
	Which we of taste and feeling are, for those parts that
	do fructify in us more than he.
	For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
	So were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school:
	But omne bene, say I; being of an old father's mind,
	Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.

	You two are book-men: can you tell me by your wit
	What was a month old at Cain's birth, that's not five
	weeks old as yet?

	Dictynna, goodman Dull; Dictynna, goodman Dull.

	What is Dictynna?

	A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.

	The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
	And raught not to five weeks when he came to
	five-score.
	The allusion holds in the exchange.

	'Tis true indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.

	God comfort thy capacity! I say, the allusion holds
	in the exchange.

	And I say, the pollusion holds in the exchange; for
	the moon is never but a month old: and I say beside
	that, 'twas a pricket that the princess killed.

	Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph
	on the death of the deer? And, to humour the
	ignorant, call I the deer the princess killed a pricket.

	Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge; so it shall
	please you to abrogate scurrility.

	I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility.
	The preyful princess pierced and prick'd a pretty
	pleasing pricket;
	Some say a sore; but not a sore, till now made
	sore with shooting.
	The dogs did yell: put L to sore, then sorel jumps
	from thicket;
	Or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting.
	If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores
	one sorel.
	Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.

	A rare talent!

	If a talent be a claw, look how he claws
	him with a talent.

	This is a gift that I have, simple, simple; a
	foolish extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures,
	shapes, objects, ideas, apprehensions, motions,
	revolutions: these are begot in the ventricle of
	memory, nourished in the womb of pia mater, and
	delivered upon the mellowing of occasion. But the
	gift is good in those in whom it is acute, and I am
	thankful for it.

	Sir, I praise the Lord for you; and so may my
	parishioners; for their sons are well tutored by
	you, and their daughters profit very greatly under
	you: you are a good member of the commonwealth.

	Mehercle, if their sons be ingenuous, they shall
	want no instruction; if their daughters be capable,
	I will put it to them: but vir sapit qui pauca
	loquitur; a soul feminine saluteth us.

	God give you good morrow, master Parson.

	Master Parson, quasi pers-on. An if one should be
	pierced, which is the one?

	Marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.

	Piercing a hogshead! a good lustre of conceit in a
	tuft of earth; fire enough for a flint, pearl enough
	for a swine: 'tis pretty; it is well.

	Good master Parson, be so good as read me this
	letter: it was given me by Costard, and sent me
	from Don Armado: I beseech you, read it.

	Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra
	Ruminat,--and so forth. Ah, good old Mantuan! I
	may speak of thee as the traveller doth of Venice;
	Venetia, Venetia,
	Chi non ti vede non ti pretia.
	Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! who understandeth thee
	not, loves thee not. Ut, re, sol, la, mi, fa.
	Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather,
	as Horace says in his--What, my soul, verses?

	Ay, sir, and very learned.

	Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse; lege, domine.

	If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
	Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vow'd!
	Though to myself forsworn, to thee I'll faithful prove:
	Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like
	osiers bow'd.
	Study his bias leaves and makes his book thine eyes,
	Where all those pleasures live that art would
	comprehend:
	If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;
	Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend,
	All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
	Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire:
	Thy eye Jove's lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
	Which not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.
	Celestial as thou art, O, pardon, love, this wrong,
	That sings heaven's praise with such an earthly tongue.

	You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the
	accent: let me supervise the canzonet. Here are
	only numbers ratified; but, for the elegancy,
	facility, and golden cadence of poesy, caret.
	Ovidius Naso was the man: and why, indeed, Naso,
	but for smelling out the odouriferous flowers of
	fancy, the jerks of invention? Imitari is nothing:
	so doth the hound his master, the ape his keeper,
	the tired horse his rider. But, damosella virgin,
	was this directed to you?

	Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Biron, one of the strange
	queen's lords.

	I will overglance the superscript: 'To the
	snow-white hand of the most beauteous Lady
	Rosaline.' I will look again on the intellect of
	the letter, for the nomination of the party writing
	to the person written unto: 'Your ladyship's in all
	desired employment, .' Sir Nathaniel, this
	Biron is one of the votaries with the king; and here
	he hath framed a letter to a sequent of the stranger
	queen's, which accidentally, or by the way of
	progression, hath miscarried. Trip and go, my
	sweet; deliver this paper into the royal hand of the
	king: it may concern much. Stay not thy
	compliment; I forgive thy duty; adieu.

	Good Costard, go with me. Sir, God save your life!

	Have with thee, my girl.

	Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
	religiously; and, as a certain father saith,--

	Sir tell me not of the father; I do fear colourable
	colours. But to return to the verses: did they
	please you, Sir Nathaniel?

	Marvellous well for the pen.

	I do dine to-day at the father's of a certain pupil
	of mine; where, if, before repast, it shall please
	you to gratify the table with a grace, I will, on my
	privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid
	child or pupil, undertake your ben venuto; where I
	will prove those verses to be very unlearned,
	neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention: I
	beseech your society.

	And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is
	the happiness of life.

	And, certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.

	Sir, I do invite you too; you shall not
	say me nay: pauca verba. Away! the gentles are at
	their game, and we will to our recreation.

	The king he is hunting the deer; I am coursing
	myself: they have pitched a toil; I am toiling in
	a pitch,--pitch that defiles: defile! a foul
	word. Well, set thee down, sorrow! for so they say
	the fool said, and so say I, and I the fool: well
	proved, wit! By the Lord, this love is as mad as
	Ajax: it kills sheep; it kills me, I a sheep:
	well proved again o' my side! I will not love: if
	I do, hang me; i' faith, I will not. O, but her
	eye,--by this light, but for her eye, I would not
	love her; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I do nothing
	in the world but lie, and lie in my throat. By
	heaven, I do love: and it hath taught me to rhyme
	and to be melancholy; and here is part of my rhyme,
	and here my melancholy. Well, she hath one o' my
	sonnets already: the clown bore it, the fool sent
	it, and the lady hath it: sweet clown, sweeter
	fool, sweetest lady! By the world, I would not care
	a pin, if the other three were in. Here comes one
	with a paper: God give him grace to groan!

	Ay me!

	Shot, by heaven! Proceed, sweet Cupid:
	thou hast thumped him with thy bird-bolt under the
	left pap. In faith, secrets!

	So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
	To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
	As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
	The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows:
	Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
	Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
	As doth thy face through tears of mine give light;
	Thou shinest in every tear that I do weep:
	No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
	So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
	Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
	And they thy glory through my grief will show:
	But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep
	My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
	O queen of queens! how far dost thou excel,
	No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.
	How shall she know my griefs? I'll drop the paper:
	Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?

	What, Longaville! and reading! listen, ear.

	Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear!

	Ay me, I am forsworn!

	Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.

	In love, I hope: sweet fellowship in shame!

	One drunkard loves another of the name.

	Am I the first that have been perjured so?

	I could put thee in comfort. Not by two that I know:
	Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
	The shape of Love's Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.

	I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move:
	O sweet Maria, empress of my love!
	These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.

	O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupid's hose:
	Disfigure not his slop.

	This same shall go.

	Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
	'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
	Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
	Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
	A woman I forswore; but I will prove,
	Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
	My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
	Thy grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me.
	Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is:
	Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
	Exhalest this vapour-vow; in thee it is:
	If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
	If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
	To lose an oath to win a paradise?

	This is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity,
	A green goose a goddess: pure, pure idolatry.
	God amend us, God amend! we are much out o' the way.

	By whom shall I send this?--Company! stay.

	All hid, all hid; an old infant play.
	Like a demigod here sit I in the sky.
	And wretched fools' secrets heedfully o'ereye.
	More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!

	Dumain transform'd! four woodcocks in a dish!

	O most divine Kate!

	O most profane coxcomb!

	By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!

	By earth, she is not, corporal, there you lie.

	Her amber hair for foul hath amber quoted.

	An amber-colour'd raven was well noted.

	As upright as the cedar.

	Stoop, I say;
	Her shoulder is with child.

	As fair as day.

	Ay, as some days; but then no sun must shine.

	O that I had my wish!

	And I had mine!

	And I mine too, good Lord!

	Amen, so I had mine: is not that a good word?

	I would forget her; but a fever she
	Reigns in my blood and will remember'd be.

	A fever in your blood! why, then incision
	Would let her out in saucers: sweet misprision!

	Once more I'll read the ode that I have writ.

	Once more I'll mark how love can vary wit.

	On a day--alack the day!--
	Love, whose month is ever May,
	Spied a blossom passing fair
	Playing in the wanton air:
	Through the velvet leaves the wind,
	All unseen, can passage find;
	That the lover, sick to death,
	Wish himself the heaven's breath.
	Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow;
	Air, would I might triumph so!
	But, alack, my hand is sworn
	Ne'er to pluck thee from thy thorn;
	Vow, alack, for youth unmeet,
	Youth so apt to pluck a sweet!
	Do not call it sin in me,
	That I am forsworn for thee;
	Thou for whom Jove would swear
	Juno but an Ethiope were;
	And deny himself for Jove,
	Turning mortal for thy love.
	This will I send, and something else more plain,
	That shall express my true love's fasting pain.
	O, would the king, Biron, and Longaville,
	Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill,
	Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note;
	For none offend where all alike do dote.

	Dumain, thy love is far from charity.
	You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
	To be o'erheard and taken napping so.

	Come, sir, you blush; as his your case is such;
	You chide at him, offending twice as much;
	You do not love Maria; Longaville
	Did never sonnet for her sake compile,
	Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
	His loving bosom to keep down his heart.
	I have been closely shrouded in this bush
	And mark'd you both and for you both did blush:
	I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion,
	Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion:
	Ay me! says one; O Jove! the other cries;
	One, her hairs were gold, crystal the other's eyes:

	You would for paradise break faith, and troth;

	And Jove, for your love, would infringe an oath.
	What will Biron say when that he shall hear
	Faith so infringed, which such zeal did swear?
	How will he scorn! how will he spend his wit!
	How will he triumph, leap and laugh at it!
	For all the wealth that ever I did see,
	I would not have him know so much by me.

	Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.

	Ah, good my liege, I pray thee, pardon me!
	Good heart, what grace hast thou, thus to reprove
	These worms for loving, that art most in love?
	Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears
	There is no certain princess that appears;
	You'll not be perjured, 'tis a hateful thing;
	Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting!
	But are you not ashamed? nay, are you not,
	All three of you, to be thus much o'ershot?
	You found his mote; the king your mote did see;
	But I a beam do find in each of three.
	O, what a scene of foolery have I seen,
	Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow and of teen!
	O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
	To see a king transformed to a gnat!
	To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
	And profound Solomon to tune a jig,
	And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
	And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
	Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumain?
	And gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
	And where my liege's? all about the breast:
	A caudle, ho!

	                  Too bitter is thy jest.
	Are we betray'd thus to thy over-view?

	Not you to me, but I betray'd by you:
	I, that am honest; I, that hold it sin
	To break the vow I am engaged in;
	I am betray'd, by keeping company
	With men like men of inconstancy.
	When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
	Or groan for love? or spend a minute's time
	In pruning me? When shall you hear that I
	Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
	A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
	A leg, a limb?

	                  Soft! whither away so fast?
	A true man or a thief that gallops so?

	I post from love: good lover, let me go.

	God bless the king!

	What present hast thou there?

	Some certain treason.

	What makes treason here?

	Nay, it makes nothing, sir.

	If it mar nothing neither,
	The treason and you go in peace away together.

	I beseech your grace, let this letter be read:
	Our parson misdoubts it; 'twas treason, he said.

	Biron, read it over.

	Where hadst thou it?

	Of Costard.

	Where hadst thou it?

	Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.

	How now! what is in you? why dost thou tear it?

	A toy, my liege, a toy: your grace needs not fear it.

	It did move him to passion, and therefore let's hear it.

	It is Biron's writing, and here is his name.

	Ah, you whoreson loggerhead! you were
	born to do me shame.
	Guilty, my lord, guilty! I confess, I confess.

	What?

	That you three fools lack'd me fool to make up the mess:
	He, he, and you, and you, my liege, and I,
	Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.
	O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.

	Now the number is even.

	True, true; we are four.
	Will these turtles be gone?

	Hence, sirs; away!

	Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.

	Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace!
	As true we are as flesh and blood can be:
	The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
	Young blood doth not obey an old decree:
	We cannot cross the cause why we were born;
	Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.

	What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?

	Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline,
	That, like a rude and savage man of Inde,
	At the first opening of the gorgeous east,
	Bows not his vassal head and strucken blind
	Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
	What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
	Dares look upon the heaven of her brow,
	That is not blinded by her majesty?

	What zeal, what fury hath inspired thee now?
	My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon;
	She an attending star, scarce seen a light.

	My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Biron:
	O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
	Of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty
	Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek,
	Where several worthies make one dignity,
	Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
	Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,--
	Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not:
	To things of sale a seller's praise belongs,
	She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot.
	A wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn,
	Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye:
	Beauty doth varnish age, as if new-born,
	And gives the crutch the cradle's infancy:
	O, 'tis the sun that maketh all things shine.

	By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.

	Is ebony like her? O wood divine!
	A wife of such wood were felicity.
	O, who can give an oath? where is a book?
	That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,
	If that she learn not of her eye to look:
	No face is fair that is not full so black.

	O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
	The hue of dungeons and the suit of night;
	And beauty's crest becomes the heavens well.

	Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.
	O, if in black my lady's brows be deck'd,
	It mourns that painting and usurping hair
	Should ravish doters with a false aspect;
	And therefore is she born to make black fair.
	Her favour turns the fashion of the days,
	For native blood is counted painting now;
	And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise,
	Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.

	To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.

	And since her time are colliers counted bright.

	And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.

	Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.

	Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
	For fear their colours should be wash'd away.

	'Twere good, yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
	I'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.

	I'll prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.

	No devil will fright thee then so much as she.

	I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.

	Look, here's thy love: my foot and her face see.

	O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
	Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!

	O, vile! then, as she goes, what upward lies
	The street should see as she walk'd overhead.

	But what of this? are we not all in love?

	Nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.

	Then leave this chat; and, good Biron, now prove
	Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.

	Ay, marry, there; some flattery for this evil.

	O, some authority how to proceed;
	Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.

	Some salve for perjury.

	'Tis more than need.
	Have at you, then, affection's men at arms.
	Consider what you first did swear unto,
	To fast, to study, and to see no woman;
	Flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth.
	Say, can you fast? your stomachs are too young;
	And abstinence engenders maladies.
	And where that you have vow'd to study, lords,
	In that each of you have forsworn his book,
	Can you still dream and pore and thereon look?
	For when would you, my lord, or you, or you,
	Have found the ground of study's excellence
	Without the beauty of a woman's face?
	[From women's eyes this doctrine I derive;
	They are the ground, the books, the academes
	From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire]
	Why, universal plodding poisons up
	The nimble spirits in the arteries,
	As motion and long-during action tires
	The sinewy vigour of the traveller.
	Now, for not looking on a woman's face,
	You have in that forsworn the use of eyes
	And study too, the causer of your vow;
	For where is any author in the world
	Teaches such beauty as a woman's eye?
	Learning is but an adjunct to ourself
	And where we are our learning likewise is:
	Then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes,
	Do we not likewise see our learning there?
	O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
	And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
	For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
	In leaden contemplation have found out
	Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
	Of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with?
	Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
	And therefore, finding barren practisers,
	Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil:
	But love, first learned in a lady's eyes,
	Lives not alone immured in the brain;
	But, with the motion of all elements,
	Courses as swift as thought in every power,
	And gives to every power a double power,
	Above their functions and their offices.
	It adds a precious seeing to the eye;
	A lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind;
	A lover's ear will hear the lowest sound,
	When the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd:
	Love's feeling is more soft and sensible
	Than are the tender horns of cockl'd snails;
	Love's tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste:
	For valour, is not Love a Hercules,
	Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
	Subtle as Sphinx; as sweet and musical
	As bright Apollo's lute, strung with his hair:
	And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
	Makes heaven drowsy with the harmony.
	Never durst poet touch a pen to write
	Until his ink were temper'd with Love's sighs;
	O, then his lines would ravish savage ears
	And plant in tyrants mild humility.
	From women's eyes this doctrine I derive:
	They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
	They are the books, the arts, the academes,
	That show, contain and nourish all the world:
	Else none at all in ought proves excellent.
	Then fools you were these women to forswear,
	Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.
	For wisdom's sake, a word that all men love,
	Or for love's sake, a word that loves all men,
	Or for men's sake, the authors of these women,
	Or women's sake, by whom we men are men,
	Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
	Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
	It is religion to be thus forsworn,
	For charity itself fulfills the law,
	And who can sever love from charity?

	Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!

	Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;
	Pell-mell, down with them! but be first advised,
	In conflict that you get the sun of them.

	Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by:
	Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?

	And win them too: therefore let us devise
	Some entertainment for them in their tents.

	First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
	Then homeward every man attach the hand
	Of his fair mistress: in the afternoon
	We will with some strange pastime solace them,
	Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
	For revels, dances, masks and merry hours
	Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.

	Away, away! no time shall be omitted
	That will betime, and may by us be fitted.

	Allons! allons! Sow'd cockle reap'd no corn;
	And justice always whirls in equal measure:
	Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
	If so, our copper buys no better treasure.

	Satis quod sufficit.

	I praise God for you, sir: your reasons at dinner
	have been sharp and sententious; pleasant without
	scurrility, witty without affection, audacious without
	impudency, learned without opinion, and strange with-
	out heresy. I did converse this quondam day with
	a companion of the king's, who is intituled, nomi-
	nated, or called, Don Adriano de Armado.

	Novi hominem tanquam te: his humour is lofty, his
	discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye
	ambitious, his gait majestical, and his general
	behavior vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. He is
	too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it
	were, too peregrinate, as I may call it.

	A most singular and choice epithet.

	He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer
	than the staple of his argument. I abhor such
	fanatical phantasimes, such insociable and
	point-devise companions; such rackers of
	orthography, as to speak dout, fine, when he should
	say doubt; det, when he should pronounce debt,--d,
	e, b, t, not d, e, t: he clepeth a calf, cauf;
	half, hauf; neighbour vocatur nebor; neigh
	abbreviated ne. This is abhominable,--which he
	would call abbominable: it insinuateth me of
	insanie: anne intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.

	Laus Deo, bene intelligo.

	Bon, bon, fort bon, Priscian! a little scratch'd,
	'twill serve.

	Videsne quis venit?

	Video, et gaudeo.

	Chirrah!

	Quare chirrah, not sirrah?

	Men of peace, well encountered.

	Most military sir, salutation.

	They have been at a great feast
	of languages, and stolen the scraps.

	O, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words.
	I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word;
	for thou art not so long by the head as
	honorificabilitudinitatibus: thou art easier
	swallowed than a flap-dragon.

	Peace! the peal begins.

	Monsieur, are you not lettered?

	Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a,
	b, spelt backward, with the horn on his head?

	Ba, pueritia, with a horn added.

	Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.

	Quis, quis, thou consonant?

	The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them; or
	the fifth, if I.

	I will repeat them,--a, e, i,--

	The sheep: the other two concludes it,--o, u.

	Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet
	touch, a quick venue of wit! snip, snap, quick and
	home! it rejoiceth my intellect: true wit!

	Offered by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.

	What is the figure? what is the figure?

	Horns.

	Thou disputest like an infant: go, whip thy gig.

	Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about
	your infamy circum circa,--a gig of a cuckold's horn.

	An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst
	have it to buy gingerbread: hold, there is the very
	remuneration I had of thy master, thou halfpenny
	purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of discretion. O, an
	the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my
	bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me!
	Go to; thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers'
	ends, as they say.

	O, I smell false Latin; dunghill for unguem.

	Arts-man, preambulate, we will be singled from the
	barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the
	charge-house on the top of the mountain?

	Or mons, the hill.

	At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.

	I do, sans question.

	Sir, it is the king's most sweet pleasure and
	affection to congratulate the princess at her
	pavilion in the posteriors of this day, which the
	rude multitude call the afternoon.

	The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is
	liable, congruent and measurable for the afternoon:
	the word is well culled, chose, sweet and apt, I do
	assure you, sir, I do assure.

	Sir, the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar,
	I do assure ye, very good friend: for what is
	inward between us, let it pass. I do beseech thee,
	remember thy courtesy; I beseech thee, apparel thy
	head: and among other important and most serious
	designs, and of great import indeed, too, but let
	that pass: for I must tell thee, it will please his
	grace, by the world, sometime to lean upon my poor
	shoulder, and with his royal finger, thus, dally
	with my excrement, with my mustachio; but, sweet
	heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no
	fable: some certain special honours it pleaseth his
	greatness to impart to Armado, a soldier, a man of
	travel, that hath seen the world; but let that pass.
	The very all of all is,--but, sweet heart, I do
	implore secrecy,--that the king would have me
	present the princess, sweet chuck, with some
	delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or
	antique, or firework. Now, understanding that the
	curate and your sweet self are good at such
	eruptions and sudden breaking out of mirth, as it
	were, I have acquainted you withal, to the end to
	crave your assistance.

	Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies.
	Sir, as concerning some entertainment of time, some
	show in the posterior of this day, to be rendered by
	our assistants, at the king's command, and this most
	gallant, illustrate, and learned gentleman, before
	the princess; I say none so fit as to present the
	Nine Worthies.

	Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?

	Joshua, yourself; myself and this gallant gentleman,
	Judas Maccabaeus; this swain, because of his great
	limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great; the
	page, Hercules,--

	Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for
	that Worthy's thumb: he is not so big as the end of his club.

	Shall I have audience? he shall present Hercules in
	minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a
	snake; and I will have an apology for that purpose.

	An excellent device! so, if any of the audience
	hiss, you may cry 'Well done, Hercules! now thou
	crushest the snake!' that is the way to make an
	offence gracious, though few have the grace to do it.

	For the rest of the Worthies?--

	I will play three myself.

	Thrice-worthy gentleman!

	Shall I tell you a thing?

	We attend.

	We will have, if this fadge not, an antique. I
	beseech you, follow.

	Via, goodman Dull! thou hast spoken no word all this while.

	Nor understood none neither, sir.

	Allons! we will employ thee.

	I'll make one in a dance, or so; or I will play
	On the tabour to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.

	Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away!

	Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
	If fairings come thus plentifully in:
	A lady wall'd about with diamonds!
	Look you what I have from the loving king.

	Madame, came nothing else along with that?

	Nothing but this! yes, as much love in rhyme
	As would be cramm'd up in a sheet of paper,
	Writ o' both sides the leaf, margent and all,
	That he was fain to seal on Cupid's name.

	That was the way to make his godhead wax,
	For he hath been five thousand years a boy.

	Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.

	You'll ne'er be friends with him; a' kill'd your sister.

	He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy;
	And so she died: had she been light, like you,
	Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
	She might ha' been a grandam ere she died:
	And so may you; for a light heart lives long.

	What's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?

	A light condition in a beauty dark.

	We need more light to find your meaning out.

	You'll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
	Therefore I'll darkly end the argument.

	Look what you do, you do it still i' the dark.

	So do not you, for you are a light wench.

	Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.

	You weigh me not? O, that's you care not for me.

	Great reason; for 'past cure is still past care.'

	Well bandied both; a set of wit well play'd.
	But Rosaline, you have a favour too:
	Who sent it? and what is it?

	I would you knew:
	An if my face were but as fair as yours,
	My favour were as great; be witness this.
	Nay, I have verses too, I thank Biron:
	The numbers true; and, were the numbering too,
	I were the fairest goddess on the ground:
	I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.
	O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!

	Any thing like?

	Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.

	Beauteous as ink; a good conclusion.

	Fair as a text B in a copy-book.

	'Ware pencils, ho! let me not die your debtor,
	My red dominical, my golden letter:
	O, that your face were not so full of O's!

	A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows.

	But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair Dumain?

	Madam, this glove.

	                  Did he not send you twain?

	Yes, madam, and moreover
	Some thousand verses of a faithful lover,
	A huge translation of hypocrisy,
	Vilely compiled, profound simplicity.

	This and these pearls to me sent Longaville:
	The letter is too long by half a mile.

	I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heart
	The chain were longer and the letter short?

	Ay, or I would these hands might never part.

	We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.

	They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
	That same Biron I'll torture ere I go:
	O that I knew he were but in by the week!
	How I would make him fawn and beg and seek
	And wait the season and observe the times
	And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes
	And shape his service wholly to my hests
	And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
	So perttaunt-like would I o'ersway his state
	That he should be my fool and I his fate.

	None are so surely caught, when they are catch'd,
	As wit turn'd fool: folly, in wisdom hatch'd,
	Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school
	And wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.

	The blood of youth burns not with such excess
	As gravity's revolt to wantonness.

	Folly in fools bears not so strong a note
	As foolery in the wise, when wit doth dote;
	Since all the power thereof it doth apply
	To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.

	Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.

	O, I am stabb'd with laughter! Where's her grace?

	Thy news Boyet?

	                  Prepare, madam, prepare!
	Arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are
	Against your peace: Love doth approach disguised,
	Armed in arguments; you'll be surprised:
	Muster your wits; stand in your own defence;
	Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.

	Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are they
	That charge their breath against us? say, scout, say.

	Under the cool shade of a sycamore
	I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
	When, lo! to interrupt my purposed rest,
	Toward that shade I might behold addrest
	The king and his companions: warily
	I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
	And overheard what you shall overhear,
	That, by and by, disguised they will be here.
	Their herald is a pretty knavish page,
	That well by heart hath conn'd his embassage:
	Action and accent did they teach him there;
	'Thus must thou speak,' and 'thus thy body bear:'
	And ever and anon they made a doubt
	Presence majestical would put him out,
	'For,' quoth the king, 'an angel shalt thou see;
	Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.'
	The boy replied, 'An angel is not evil;
	I should have fear'd her had she been a devil.'
	With that, all laugh'd and clapp'd him on the shoulder,
	Making the bold wag by their praises bolder:
	One rubb'd his elbow thus, and fleer'd and swore
	A better speech was never spoke before;
	Another, with his finger and his thumb,
	Cried, 'Via! we will do't, come what will come;'
	The third he caper'd, and cried, 'All goes well;'
	The fourth turn'd on the toe, and down he fell.
	With that, they all did tumble on the ground,
	With such a zealous laughter, so profound,
	That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
	To cheque their folly, passion's solemn tears.

	But what, but what, come they to visit us?

	They do, they do: and are apparell'd thus.
	Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.
	Their purpose is to parle, to court and dance;
	And every one his love-feat will advance
	Unto his several mistress, which they'll know
	By favours several which they did bestow.

	And will they so? the gallants shall be task'd;
	For, ladies, we shall every one be mask'd;
	And not a man of them shall have the grace,
	Despite of suit, to see a lady's face.
	Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
	And then the king will court thee for his dear;
	Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
	So shall Biron take me for Rosaline.
	And change your favours too; so shall your loves
	Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.

	Come on, then; wear the favours most in sight.

	But in this changing what is your intent?

	The effect of my intent is to cross theirs:
	They do it but in mocking merriment;
	And mock for mock is only my intent.
	Their several counsels they unbosom shall
	To loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal
	Upon the next occasion that we meet,
	With visages displayed, to talk and greet.

	But shall we dance, if they desire to't?

	No, to the death, we will not move a foot;
	Nor to their penn'd speech render we no grace,
	But while 'tis spoke each turn away her face.

	Why, that contempt will kill the speaker's heart,
	And quite divorce his memory from his part.

	Therefore I do it; and I make no doubt
	The rest will ne'er come in, if he be out
	There's no such sport as sport by sport o'erthrown,
	To make theirs ours and ours none but our own:
	So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
	And they, well mock'd, depart away with shame.

	The trumpet sounds: be mask'd; the maskers come.

	All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!--

	Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.

	A holy parcel of the fairest dames.

	That ever turn'd their--backs--to mortal views!

	Their eyes, villain, their eyes!

	That ever turn'd their eyes to mortal views!--Out--

	True; out indeed.

	Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
	Not to behold--

	Once to behold, rogue.

	Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes,
	--with your sun-beamed eyes--

	They will not answer to that epithet;
	You were best call it 'daughter-beamed eyes.'

	They do not mark me, and that brings me out.

	Is this your perfectness? be gone, you rogue!

	What would these strangers? know their minds, Boyet:
	If they do speak our language, 'tis our will:
	That some plain man recount their purposes
	Know what they would.

	What would you with the princess?

	Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.

	What would they, say they?

	Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.

	Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.

	She says, you have it, and you may be gone.

	Say to her, we have measured many miles
	To tread a measure with her on this grass.

	They say, that they have measured many a mile
	To tread a measure with you on this grass.

	It is not so. Ask them how many inches
	Is in one mile: if they have measured many,
	The measure then of one is easily told.

	If to come hither you have measured miles,
	And many miles, the princess bids you tell
	How many inches doth fill up one mile.

	Tell her, we measure them by weary steps.

	She hears herself.

	                  How many weary steps,
	Of many weary miles you have o'ergone,
	Are number'd in the travel of one mile?

	We number nothing that we spend for you:
	Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
	That we may do it still without accompt.
	Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
	That we, like savages, may worship it.

	My face is but a moon, and clouded too.

	Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do!
	Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
	Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.

	O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter;
	Thou now request'st but moonshine in the water.

	Then, in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
	Thou bid'st me beg: this begging is not strange.

	Play, music, then! Nay, you must do it soon.

	Not yet! no dance! Thus change I like the moon.

	Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?

	You took the moon at full, but now she's changed.

	Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.
	The music plays; vouchsafe some motion to it.

	Our ears vouchsafe it.

	But your legs should do it.

	Since you are strangers and come here by chance,
	We'll not be nice: take hands. We will not dance.

	Why take we hands, then?

	Only to part friends:
	Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.

	More measure of this measure; be not nice.

	We can afford no more at such a price.

	Prize you yourselves: what buys your company?

	Your absence only.

	                  That can never be.

	Then cannot we be bought: and so, adieu;
	Twice to your visor, and half once to you.

	If you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.

	In private, then.

	                  I am best pleased with that.

	White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.

	Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.

	Nay then, two treys, and if you grow so nice,
	Metheglin, wort, and malmsey: well run, dice!
	There's half-a-dozen sweets.

	Seventh sweet, adieu:
	Since you can cog, I'll play no more with you.

	One word in secret.

	Let it not be sweet.

	Thou grievest my gall.

	Gall! bitter.

	Therefore meet.

	Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?

	Name it.

	Fair lady,--

	Say you so? Fair lord,--
	Take that for your fair lady.

	Please it you,
	As much in private, and I'll bid adieu.

	What, was your vizard made without a tongue?

	I know the reason, lady, why you ask.

	O for your reason! quickly, sir; I long.

	You have a double tongue within your mask,
	And would afford my speechless vizard half.

	Veal, quoth the Dutchman. Is not 'veal' a calf?

	A calf, fair lady!

	                  No, a fair lord calf.

	Let's part the word.

	No, I'll not be your half
	Take all, and wean it; it may prove an ox.

	Look, how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
	Will you give horns, chaste lady? do not so.

	Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.

	One word in private with you, ere I die.

	Bleat softly then; the butcher hears you cry.

	The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
	As is the razor's edge invisible,
	Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
	Above the sense of sense; so sensible
	Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings
	Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.

	Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.

	By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!

	Farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.

	Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.

	Are these the breed of wits so wonder'd at?

	Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puff'd out.

	Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.

	O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
	Will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight?
	Or ever, but in vizards, show their faces?
	This pert Biron was out of countenance quite.

	O, they were all in lamentable cases!
	The king was weeping-ripe for a good word.

	Biron did swear himself out of all suit.

	Dumain was at my service, and his sword:
	No point, quoth I; my servant straight was mute.

	Lord Longaville said, I came o'er his heart;
	And trow you what he called me?

	Qualm, perhaps.

	Yes, in good faith.

	Go, sickness as thou art!

	Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
	But will you hear? the king is my love sworn.

	And quick Biron hath plighted faith to me.

	And Longaville was for my service born.

	Dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.

	Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
	Immediately they will again be here
	In their own shapes; for it can never be
	They will digest this harsh indignity.

	Will they return?

	                  They will, they will, God knows,
	And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:
	Therefore change favours; and, when they repair,
	Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.

	How blow? how blow? speak to be understood.

	Fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud;
	Dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
	Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.

	Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do,
	If they return in their own shapes to woo?

	Good madam, if by me you'll be advised,
	Let's, mock them still, as well known as disguised:
	Let us complain to them what fools were here,
	Disguised like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
	And wonder what they were and to what end
	Their shallow shows and prologue vilely penn'd
	And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
	Should be presented at our tent to us.

	Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand.

	Whip to our tents, as roes run o'er land.

	Fair sir, God save you! Where's the princess?

	Gone to her tent. Please it your majesty
	Command me any service to her thither?

	That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.

	I will; and so will she, I know, my lord.

	This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease,
	And utters it again when God doth please:
	He is wit's pedler, and retails his wares
	At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs;
	And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
	Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
	This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
	Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve;
	A' can carve too, and lisp: why, this is he
	That kiss'd his hand away in courtesy;
	This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice,
	That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
	In honourable terms: nay, he can sing
	A mean most meanly; and in ushering
	Mend him who can: the ladies call him sweet;
	The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet:
	This is the flower that smiles on every one,
	To show his teeth as white as whale's bone;
	And consciences, that will not die in debt,
	Pay him the due of honey-tongued Boyet.

	A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
	That put Armado's page out of his part!

	See where it comes! Behavior, what wert thou
	Till this madman show'd thee? and what art thou now?

	All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!

	'Fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as I conceive.

	Construe my speeches better, if you may.

	Then wish me better; I will give you leave.

	We came to visit you, and purpose now
	To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.

	This field shall hold me; and so hold your vow:
	Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.

	Rebuke me not for that which you provoke:
	The virtue of your eye must break my oath.

	You nickname virtue; vice you should have spoke;
	For virtue's office never breaks men's troth.
	Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
	As the unsullied lily, I protest,
	A world of torments though I should endure,
	I would not yield to be your house's guest;
	So much I hate a breaking cause to be
	Of heavenly oaths, vow'd with integrity.

	O, you have lived in desolation here,
	Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.

	Not so, my lord; it is not so, I swear;
	We have had pastimes here and pleasant game:
	A mess of Russians left us but of late.

	How, madam! Russians!

	Ay, in truth, my lord;
	Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.

	Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord:
	My lady, to the manner of the days,
	In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
	We four indeed confronted were with four
	In Russian habit: here they stay'd an hour,
	And talk'd apace; and in that hour, my lord,
	They did not bless us with one happy word.
	I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
	When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.

	This jest is dry to me. Fair gentle sweet,
	Your wit makes wise things foolish: when we greet,
	With eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye,
	By light we lose light: your capacity
	Is of that nature that to your huge store
	Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.

	This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye,--

	I am a fool, and full of poverty.

	But that you take what doth to you belong,
	It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.

	O, I am yours, and all that I possess!

	All the fool mine?

	                  I cannot give you less.

	Which of the vizards was it that you wore?

	Where? when? what vizard? why demand you this?

	There, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
	That hid the worse and show'd the better face.

	We are descried; they'll mock us now downright.

	Let us confess and turn it to a jest.

	Amazed, my lord? why looks your highness sad?

	Help, hold his brows! he'll swoon! Why look you pale?
	Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.

	Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
	Can any face of brass hold longer out?
	Here stand I	lady, dart thy skill at me;
	Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout;
	Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance;
	Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit;
	And I will wish thee never more to dance,
	Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
	O, never will I trust to speeches penn'd,
	Nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue,
	Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
	Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song!
	Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
	Three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation,
	Figures pedantical; these summer-flies
	Have blown me full of maggot ostentation:
	I do forswear them; and I here protest,
	By this white glove;--how white the hand, God knows!--
	Henceforth my wooing mind shall be express'd
	In russet yeas and honest kersey noes:
	And, to begin, wench,--so God help me, la!--
	My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.

	Sans sans, I pray you.

	Yet I have a trick
	Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick;
	I'll leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see:
	Write, 'Lord have mercy on us' on those three;
	They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
	They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes;
	These lords are visited; you are not free,
	For the Lord's tokens on you do I see.

	No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.

	Our states are forfeit: seek not to undo us.

	It is not so; for how can this be true,
	That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?

	Peace! for I will not have to do with you.

	Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.

	Speak for yourselves; my wit is at an end.

	Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
	Some fair excuse.

	                  The fairest is confession.
	Were not you here but even now disguised?

	Madam, I was.

	                  And were you well advised?

	I was, fair madam.

	                  When you then were here,
	What did you whisper in your lady's ear?

	That more than all the world I did respect her.

	When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.

	Upon mine honour, no.

	Peace, peace! forbear:
	Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.

	Despise me, when I break this oath of mine.

	I will: and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
	What did the Russian whisper in your ear?

	Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
	As precious eyesight, and did value me
	Above this world; adding thereto moreover
	That he would wed me, or else die my lover.

	God give thee joy of him! the noble lord
	Most honourably doth unhold his word.

	What mean you, madam? by my life, my troth,
	I never swore this lady such an oath.

	By heaven, you did; and to confirm it plain,
	You gave me this: but take it, sir, again.

	My faith and this the princess I did give:
	I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.

	Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;
	And Lord Biron, I thank him, is my dear.
	What, will you have me, or your pearl again?

	Neither of either; I remit both twain.
	I see the trick on't: here was a consent,
	Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
	To dash it like a Christmas comedy:
	Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,
	Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick,
	That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
	To make my lady laugh when she's disposed,
	Told our intents before; which once disclosed,
	The ladies did change favours: and then we,
	Following the signs, woo'd but the sign of she.
	Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
	We are again forsworn, in will and error.
	Much upon this it is: and might not you

	Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
	Do not you know my lady's foot by the squier,
	And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
	And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
	Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
	You put our page out: go, you are allow'd;
	Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
	You leer upon me, do you? there's an eye
	Wounds like a leaden sword.

	Full merrily
	Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.

	Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace! I have done.

	Welcome, pure wit! thou partest a fair fray.

	O Lord, sir, they would know
	Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.

	What, are there but three?

	No, sir; but it is vara fine,
	For every one pursents three.

	And three times thrice is nine.

	Not so, sir; under correction, sir; I hope it is not so.
	You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir we know
	what we know:
	I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir,--

	Is not nine.

	Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.

	By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.

	O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living
	by reckoning, sir.

	How much is it?

	O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors,
	sir, will show whereuntil it doth amount: for mine
	own part, I am, as they say, but to parfect one man
	in one poor man, Pompion the Great, sir.

	Art thou one of the Worthies?

	It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompion the
	Great: for mine own part, I know not the degree of
	the Worthy, but I am to stand for him.

	Go, bid them prepare.

	We will turn it finely off, sir; we will take
	some care.

	Biron, they will shame us: let them not approach.

	We are shame-proof, my lord: and tis some policy
	To have one show worse than the king's and his company.

	I say they shall not come.

	Nay, my good lord, let me o'errule you now:
	That sport best pleases that doth least know how:
	Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
	Dies in the zeal of that which it presents:
	Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
	When great things labouring perish in their birth.

	A right description of our sport, my lord.

	Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal
	sweet breath as will utter a brace of words.

	Doth this man serve God?

	Why ask you?

	He speaks not like a man of God's making.


	That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for,
	I protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding
	fantastical; too, too vain, too too vain: but we
	will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la guerra.
	I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!

	Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He
	presents Hector of Troy; the swain, Pompey the
	Great; the parish curate, Alexander; Armado's page,
	Hercules; the pedant, Judas Maccabaeus: And if
	these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
	These four will change habits, and present the other five.

	There is five in the first show.

	You are deceived; 'tis not so.

	The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool
	and the boy:--
	Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
	Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.

	The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.

	I Pompey am,--

	                  You lie, you are not he.

	I Pompey am,--

	                  With libbard's head on knee.

	Well said, old mocker: I must needs be friends
	with thee.

	I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big--

	The Great.

	It is, 'Great,' sir:--
		 Pompey surnamed the Great;
	That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make
	my foe to sweat:
	And travelling along this coast, I here am come by chance,
	And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France,
	If your ladyship would say, 'Thanks, Pompey,' I had done.

	Great thanks, great Pompey.

	'Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect: I
	made a little fault in 'Great.'

	My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.

	When in the world I lived, I was the world's
	commander;
	By east, west, north, and south, I spread my
	conquering might:
	My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander,--

	Your nose says, no, you are not for it stands too right.

	Your nose smells 'no' in this, most tender-smelling knight.

	The conqueror is dismay'd. Proceed, good Alexander.

	When in the world I lived, I was the world's
	commander,--

	Most true, 'tis right; you were so, Alisander.

	Pompey the Great,--

	Your servant, and Costard.

	Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.

	O, sir, you have overthrown
	Alisander the conqueror! You will be scraped out of
	the painted cloth for this: your lion, that holds
	his poll-axe sitting on a close-stool, will be given
	to Ajax: he will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror,
	and afeard to speak! run away for shame, Alisander.

	There, an't shall please you; a foolish mild man; an
	honest man, look you, and soon dashed. He is a
	marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good
	bowler: but, for Alisander,--alas, you see how
	'tis,--a little o'erparted. But there are Worthies
	a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.

	Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
	Whose club kill'd Cerberus, that three-headed canis;
	And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
	Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.
	Quoniam he seemeth in minority,
	Ergo I come with this apology.
	Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.

	Judas I am,--

	A Judas!

	Not Iscariot, sir.
	Judas I am, ycliped Maccabaeus.

	Judas Maccabaeus clipt is plain Judas.

	A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?

	Judas I am,--

	The more shame for you, Judas.

	What mean you, sir?

	To make Judas hang himself.

	Begin, sir; you are my elder.

	Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.

	I will not be put out of countenance.

	Because thou hast no face.

	What is this?

	A cittern-head.

	The head of a bodkin.

	A Death's face in a ring.

	The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.

	The pommel of Caesar's falchion.

	The carved-bone face on a flask.

	Saint George's half-cheek in a brooch.

	Ay, and in a brooch of lead.

	Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer.
	And now forward; for we have put thee in countenance.

	You have put me out of countenance.

	False; we have given thee faces.

	But you have out-faced them all.

	An thou wert a lion, we would do so.

	Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
	And so adieu, sweet Jude! nay, why dost thou stay?

	For the latter end of his name.

	For the ass to the Jude; give it him:--Jud-as, away!

	This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.

	A light for Monsieur Judas! it grows dark, he may stumble.

	Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!

	Hide thy head, Achilles: here comes Hector in arms.

	Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.

	Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.

	But is this Hector?

	I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.

	His leg is too big for Hector's.

	More calf, certain.

	No; he is best endued in the small.

	This cannot be Hector.

	He's a god or a painter; for he makes faces.

	The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
	Gave Hector a gift,--

	A gilt nutmeg.

	A lemon.

	Stuck with cloves.

	No, cloven.

	Peace!--
	The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty
	Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
	A man so breathed, that certain he would fight; yea
	From morn till night, out of his pavilion.
	I am that flower,--

	That mint.

	That columbine.

	Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.

	I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against Hector.

	Ay, and Hector's a greyhound.


	The sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks,
	beat not the bones of the buried: when he breathed,
	he was a man. But I will forward with my device.

	Sweet royalty, bestow on me the sense of hearing.

	Speak, brave Hector: we are much delighted.

	I do adore thy sweet grace's slipper.

	Loves her by the foot,--

	He may not by the yard.

	This Hector far surmounted Hannibal,--

	The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; she
	is two months on her way.

	What meanest thou?

	Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor
	wench is cast away: she's quick; the child brags in
	her belly already: tis yours.

	Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? thou shalt
	die.

	Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that is
	quick by him and hanged for Pompey that is dead by
	him.

	Most rare Pompey!

	Renowned Pompey!

	Greater than great, great, great, great Pompey!
	Pompey the Huge!

	Hector trembles.

	Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! stir them
	on! stir them on!

	Hector will challenge him.

	Ay, if a' have no man's blood in's belly than will
	sup a flea.

	By the north pole, I do challenge thee.

	I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man:
	I'll slash; I'll do it by the sword. I bepray you,
	let me borrow my arms again.

	Room for the incensed Worthies!

	I'll do it in my shirt.

	Most resolute Pompey!

	Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. Do you
	not see Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What mean
	you? You will lose your reputation.


	Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; I will not combat
	in my shirt.

	You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.

	Sweet bloods, I both may and will.

	What reason have you for't?


	The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt; I go
	woolward for penance.

	True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of
	linen: since when, I'll be sworn, he wore none but
	a dishclout of Jaquenetta's, and that a' wears next
	his heart for a favour.

	God save you, madam!

	Welcome, Mercade;
	But that thou interrupt'st our merriment.

	I am sorry, madam; for the news I bring
	Is heavy in my tongue. The king your father--

	Dead, for my life!

	Even so; my tale is told.

	Worthies, away! the scene begins to cloud.

	For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have
	seen the day of wrong through the little hole of
	discretion, and I will right myself like a soldier.

	How fares your majesty?

	Boyet, prepare; I will away tonight.

	Madam, not so; I do beseech you, stay.

	Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
	For all your fair endeavors; and entreat,
	Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
	In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
	The liberal opposition of our spirits,
	If over-boldly we have borne ourselves
	In the converse of breath: your gentleness
	Was guilty of it. Farewell worthy lord!
	A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue:
	Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
	For my great suit so easily obtain'd.

	The extreme parts of time extremely forms
	All causes to the purpose of his speed,
	And often at his very loose decides
	That which long process could not arbitrate:
	And though the mourning brow of progeny
	Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
	The holy suit which fain it would convince,
	Yet, since love's argument was first on foot,
	Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
	From what it purposed; since, to wail friends lost
	Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
	As to rejoice at friends but newly found.

	I understand you not: my griefs are double.

	Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
	And by these badges understand the king.
	For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
	Play'd foul play with our oaths: your beauty, ladies,
	Hath much deform'd us, fashioning our humours
	Even to the opposed end of our intents:
	And what in us hath seem'd ridiculous,--
	As love is full of unbefitting strains,
	All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
	Form'd by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
	Full of strange shapes, of habits and of forms,
	Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
	To every varied object in his glance:
	Which parti-coated presence of loose love
	Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes,
	Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities,
	Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults,
	Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,
	Our love being yours, the error that love makes
	Is likewise yours: we to ourselves prove false,
	By being once false for ever to be true
	To those that make us both,--fair ladies, you:
	And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
	Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.

	We have received your letters full of love;
	Your favours, the ambassadors of love;
	And, in our maiden council, rated them
	At courtship, pleasant jest and courtesy,
	As bombast and as lining to the time:
	But more devout than this in our respects
	Have we not been; and therefore met your loves
	In their own fashion, like a merriment.

	Our letters, madam, show'd much more than jest.

	So did our looks.

	                  We did not quote them so.

	Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
	Grant us your loves.

	A time, methinks, too short
	To make a world-without-end bargain in.
	No, no, my lord, your grace is perjured much,
	Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this:
	If for my love, as there is no such cause,
	You will do aught, this shall you do for me:
	Your oath I will not trust; but go with speed
	To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
	Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
	There stay until the twelve celestial signs
	Have brought about the annual reckoning.
	If this austere insociable life
	Change not your offer made in heat of blood;
	If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds
	Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
	But that it bear this trial and last love;
	Then, at the expiration of the year,
	Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
	And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine
	I will be thine; and till that instant shut
	My woeful self up in a mourning house,
	Raining the tears of lamentation
	For the remembrance of my father's death.
	If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
	Neither entitled in the other's heart.

	If this, or more than this, I would deny,
	To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
	The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
	Hence ever then my heart is in thy breast.

	[And what to me, my love? and what to me?

	You must be purged too, your sins are rack'd,
	You are attaint with faults and perjury:
	Therefore if you my favour mean to get,
	A twelvemonth shall you spend, and never rest,
	But seek the weary beds of people sick]

	But what to me, my love? but what to me? A wife?

	A beard, fair health, and honesty;
	With three-fold love I wish you all these three.

	O, shall I say, I thank you, gentle wife?

	Not so, my lord; a twelvemonth and a day
	I'll mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say:
	Come when the king doth to my lady come;
	Then, if I have much love, I'll give you some.

	I'll serve thee true and faithfully till then.

	Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.

	What says Maria?

	                  At the twelvemonth's end
	I'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.

	I'll stay with patience; but the time is long.

	The liker you; few taller are so young.

	Studies my lady? mistress, look on me;
	Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
	What humble suit attends thy answer there:
	Impose some service on me for thy love.

	Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Biron,
	Before I saw you; and the world's large tongue
	Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
	Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
	Which you on all estates will execute
	That lie within the mercy of your wit.
	To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
	And therewithal to win me, if you please,
	Without the which I am not to be won,
	You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
	Visit the speechless sick and still converse
	With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
	With all the fierce endeavor of your wit
	To enforce the pained impotent to smile.

	To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
	It cannot be; it is impossible:
	Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.

	Why, that's the way to choke a gibing spirit,
	Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
	Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools:
	A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
	Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
	Of him that makes it: then, if sickly ears,
	Deaf'd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
	Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
	And I will have you and that fault withal;
	But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
	And I shall find you empty of that fault,
	Right joyful of your reformation.

	A twelvemonth! well; befall what will befall,
	I'll jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.

	Ay, sweet my lord; and so I take my leave.

	No, madam; we will bring you on your way.

	Our wooing doth not end like an old play;
	Jack hath not Jill: these ladies' courtesy
	Might well have made our sport a comedy.

	Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day,
	And then 'twill end.

	That's too long for a play.

	Sweet majesty, vouchsafe me,--

	Was not that Hector?

	The worthy knight of Troy.

	I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am
	a votary; I have vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the
	plough for her sweet love three years. But, most
	esteemed greatness, will you hear the dialogue that
	the two learned men have compiled in praise of the
	owl and the cuckoo? It should have followed in the
	end of our show.

	Call them forth quickly; we will do so.

	Holla! approach.

	This side is Hiems, Winter, this Ver, the Spring;
	the one maintained by the owl, the other by the
	cuckoo. Ver, begin.

	When daisies pied and violets blue
	And lady-smocks all silver-white
	And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
	Do paint the meadows with delight,
	The cuckoo then, on every tree,
	Mocks married men; for thus sings he, 	Cuckoo;
	Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
	Unpleasing to a married ear!

	When shepherds pipe on oaten straws
	And merry larks are ploughmen's clocks,
	When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws,
	And maidens bleach their summer smocks
	The cuckoo then, on every tree,
	Mocks married men; for thus sings he, 	Cuckoo;
	Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
	Unpleasing to a married ear!
	
	When icicles hang by the wall
	And Dick the shepherd blows his nail
	And Tom bears logs into the hall
	And milk comes frozen home in pail,
	When blood is nipp'd and ways be foul,
	Then nightly sings the staring owl, 	Tu-whit;
	Tu-who, a merry note,
	While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

	When all aloud the wind doth blow
	And coughing drowns the parson's saw
	And birds sit brooding in the snow
	And Marian's nose looks red and raw,
	When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
	Then nightly sings the staring owl, 	Tu-whit;
	Tu-who, a merry note,
	While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.

	The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of
	Apollo. You that way: we this way.




	Who's there?

	Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself.

	Long live the king!

	Bernardo?

	He.

	You come most carefully upon your hour.

	'Tis now struck twelve; get thee to bed, Francisco.

	For this relief much thanks: 'tis bitter cold,
	And I am sick at heart.

	Have you had quiet guard?

	Not a mouse stirring.

	Well, good night.
	If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,
	The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste.

	I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who's there?

	Friends to this ground.

	And liegemen to the Dane.

	Give you good night.

	O, farewell, honest soldier:
	Who hath relieved you?

	Bernardo has my place.
	Give you good night.

	Holla! Bernardo!

	Say,
	What, is Horatio there?

	A piece of him.

	Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus.

	What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?

	I have seen nothing.

	Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,
	And will not let belief take hold of him
	Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us:
	Therefore I have entreated him along
	With us to watch the minutes of this night;
	That if again this apparition come,
	He may approve our eyes and speak to it.

	Tush, tush, 'twill not appear.

	Sit down awhile;
	And let us once again assail your ears,
	That are so fortified against our story
	What we have two nights seen.

	Well, sit we down,
	And let us hear Bernardo speak of this.

	Last night of all,
	When yond same star that's westward from the pole
	Had made his course to illume that part of heaven
	Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,
	The bell then beating one,--

	Peace, break thee off; look, where it comes again!

	In the same figure, like the king that's dead.

	Thou art a scholar; speak to it, Horatio.

	Looks it not like the king?  mark it, Horatio.

	Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder.

	It would be spoke to.

	Question it, Horatio.

	What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,
	Together with that fair and warlike form
	In which the majesty of buried Denmark
	Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!

	It is offended.

	                  See, it stalks away!

	Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee, speak!

	'Tis gone, and will not answer.

	How now, Horatio! you tremble and look pale:
	Is not this something more than fantasy?
	What think you on't?

	Before my God, I might not this believe
	Without the sensible and true avouch
	Of mine own eyes.

	                  Is it not like the king?

	As thou art to thyself:
	Such was the very armour he had on
	When he the ambitious Norway combated;
	So frown'd he once, when, in an angry parle,
	He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice.
	'Tis strange.

	Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
	With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch.

	In what particular thought to work I know not;
	But in the gross and scope of my opinion,
	This bodes some strange eruption to our state.

	Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,
	Why this same strict and most observant watch
	So nightly toils the subject of the land,
	And why such daily cast of brazen cannon,
	And foreign mart for implements of war;
	Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task
	Does not divide the Sunday from the week;
	What might be toward, that this sweaty haste
	Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day:
	Who is't that can inform me?

	That can I;
	At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,
	Whose image even but now appear'd to us,
	Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,
	Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,
	Dared to the combat; in which our valiant Hamlet--
	For so this side of our known world esteem'd him--
	Did slay this Fortinbras; who by a seal'd compact,
	Well ratified by law and heraldry,
	Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands
	Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror:
	Against the which, a moiety competent
	Was gaged by our king; which had return'd
	To the inheritance of Fortinbras,
	Had he been vanquisher; as, by the same covenant,
	And carriage of the article design'd,
	His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,
	Of unimproved mettle hot and full,
	Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there
	Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,
	For food and diet, to some enterprise
	That hath a stomach in't; which is no other--
	As it doth well appear unto our state--
	But to recover of us, by strong hand
	And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands
	So by his father lost: and this, I take it,
	Is the main motive of our preparations,
	The source of this our watch and the chief head
	Of this post-haste and romage in the land.

	I think it be no other but e'en so:
	Well may it sort that this portentous figure
	Comes armed through our watch; so like the king
	That was and is the question of these wars.

	A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye.
	In the most high and palmy state of Rome,
	A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,
	The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead
	Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets:
	As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,
	Disasters in the sun; and the moist star
	Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands
	Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse:
	And even the like precurse of fierce events,
	As harbingers preceding still the fates
	And prologue to the omen coming on,
	Have heaven and earth together demonstrated
	Unto our climatures and countrymen.--
	But soft, behold! lo, where it comes again!

	I'll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion!
	If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,
	Speak to me:
	If there be any good thing to be done,
	That may to thee do ease and grace to me,
	Speak to me:

	If thou art privy to thy country's fate,
	Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!
	Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life
	Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,
	For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,
	Speak of it: stay, and speak! Stop it, Marcellus.

	Shall I strike at it with my partisan?

	Do, if it will not stand.

	'Tis here!

	'Tis here!

	'Tis gone!

	We do it wrong, being so majestical,
	To offer it the show of violence;
	For it is, as the air, invulnerable,
	And our vain blows malicious mockery.

	It was about to speak, when the cock crew.

	And then it started like a guilty thing
	Upon a fearful summons. I have heard,
	The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,
	Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat
	Awake the god of day; and, at his warning,
	Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,
	The extravagant and erring spirit hies
	To his confine: and of the truth herein
	This present object made probation.

	It faded on the crowing of the cock.
	Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes
	Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,
	The bird of dawning singeth all night long:
	And then, they say, no spirit dares stir abroad;
	The nights are wholesome; then no planets strike,
	No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,
	So hallow'd and so gracious is the time.

	So have I heard and do in part believe it.
	But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
	Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill:
	Break we our watch up; and by my advice,
	Let us impart what we have seen to-night
	Unto young Hamlet; for, upon my life,
	This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him.
	Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,
	As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?

	Let's do't, I pray; and I this morning know
	Where we shall find him most conveniently.

	Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death
	The memory be green, and that it us befitted
	To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom
	To be contracted in one brow of woe,
	Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature
	That we with wisest sorrow think on him,
	Together with remembrance of ourselves.
	Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,
	The imperial jointress to this warlike state,
	Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,--
	With an auspicious and a dropping eye,
	With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,
	In equal scale weighing delight and dole,--
	Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr'd
	Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone
	With this affair along. For all, our thanks.
	Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,
	Holding a weak supposal of our worth,
	Or thinking by our late dear brother's death
	Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,
	Colleagued with the dream of his advantage,
	He hath not fail'd to pester us with message,
	Importing the surrender of those lands
	Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
	To our most valiant brother. So much for him.
	Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:
	Thus much the business is: we have here writ
	To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,--
	Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears
	Of this his nephew's purpose,--to suppress
	His further gait herein; in that the levies,
	The lists and full proportions, are all made
	Out of his subject: and we here dispatch
	You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand,
	For bearers of this greeting to old Norway;
	Giving to you no further personal power
	To business with the king, more than the scope
	Of these delated articles allow.
	Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.


	In that and all things will we show our duty.

	We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell.

	And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?
	You told us of some suit; what is't, Laertes?
	You cannot speak of reason to the Dane,
	And loose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes,
	That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?
	The head is not more native to the heart,
	The hand more instrumental to the mouth,
	Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father.
	What wouldst thou have, Laertes?

	My dread lord,
	Your leave and favour to return to France;
	From whence though willingly I came to Denmark,
	To show my duty in your coronation,
	Yet now, I must confess, that duty done,
	My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France
	And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.

	Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?

	He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave
	By laboursome petition, and at last
	Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent:
	I do beseech you, give him leave to go.

	Take thy fair hour, Laertes; time be thine,
	And thy best graces spend it at thy will!
	But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son,--

	A little more than kin, and less than kind.

	How is it that the clouds still hang on you?

	Not so, my lord; I am too much i' the sun.

	Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,
	And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
	Do not for ever with thy vailed lids
	Seek for thy noble father in the dust:
	Thou know'st 'tis common; all that lives must die,
	Passing through nature to eternity.

	Ay, madam, it is common.

	If it be,
	Why seems it so particular with thee?

	Seems, madam! nay it is; I know not 'seems.'
	'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
	Nor customary suits of solemn black,
	Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
	No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
	Nor the dejected 'havior of the visage,
	Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,
	That can denote me truly: these indeed seem,
	For they are actions that a man might play:
	But I have that within which passeth show;
	These but the trappings and the suits of woe.

	'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,
	To give these mourning duties to your father:
	But, you must know, your father lost a father;
	That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound
	In filial obligation for some term
	To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever
	In obstinate condolement is a course
	Of impious stubbornness; 'tis unmanly grief;
	It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,
	A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,
	An understanding simple and unschool'd:
	For what we know must be and is as common
	As any the most vulgar thing to sense,
	Why should we in our peevish opposition
	Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,
	A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,
	To reason most absurd: whose common theme
	Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,
	From the first corse till he that died to-day,
	'This must be so.' We pray you, throw to earth
	This unprevailing woe, and think of us
	As of a father: for let the world take note,
	You are the most immediate to our throne;
	And with no less nobility of love
	Than that which dearest father bears his son,
	Do I impart toward you. For your intent
	In going back to school in Wittenberg,
	It is most retrograde to our desire:
	And we beseech you, bend you to remain
	Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye,
	Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.

	Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet:
	I pray thee, stay with us; go not to Wittenberg.

	I shall in all my best obey you, madam.

	Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply:
	Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come;
	This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet
	Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof,
	No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day,
	But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,
	And the king's rouse the heavens all bruit again,
	Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away.

	O, that this too too solid flesh would melt
	Thaw and resolve itself into a dew!
	Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd
	His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!
	How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,
	Seem to me all the uses of this world!
	Fie on't! ah fie! 'tis an unweeded garden,
	That grows to seed; things rank and gross in nature
	Possess it merely. That it should come to this!
	But two months dead: nay, not so much, not two:
	So excellent a king; that was, to this,
	Hyperion to a satyr; so loving to my mother
	That he might not beteem the winds of heaven
	Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!
	Must I remember? why, she would hang on him,
	As if increase of appetite had grown
	By what it fed on: and yet, within a month--
	Let me not think on't--Frailty, thy name is woman!--
	A little month, or ere those shoes were old
	With which she follow'd my poor father's body,
	Like Niobe, all tears:--why she, even she--
	O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason,
	Would have mourn'd longer--married with my uncle,
	My father's brother, but no more like my father
	Than I to Hercules: within a month:
	Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears
	Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,
	She married. O, most wicked speed, to post
	With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!
	It is not nor it cannot come to good:
	But break, my heart; for I must hold my tongue.

	Hail to your lordship!

	I am glad to see you well:
	Horatio,--or I do forget myself.

	The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.

	Sir, my good friend; I'll change that name with you:
	And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus?

	My good lord--

	I am very glad to see you. Good even, sir.
	But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?

	A truant disposition, good my lord.

	I would not hear your enemy say so,
	Nor shall you do mine ear that violence,
	To make it truster of your own report
	Against yourself: I know you are no truant.
	But what is your affair in Elsinore?
	We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.

	My lord, I came to see your father's funeral.

	I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student;
	I think it was to see my mother's wedding.

	Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon.

	Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats
	Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.
	Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven
	Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!
	My father!--methinks I see my father.

	Where, my lord?

	                  In my mind's eye, Horatio.

	I saw him once; he was a goodly king.

	He was a man, take him for all in all,
	I shall not look upon his like again.

	My lord, I think I saw him yesternight.

	Saw? who?

	My lord, the king your father.

	The king my father!

	Season your admiration for awhile
	With an attent ear, till I may deliver,
	Upon the witness of these gentlemen,
	This marvel to you.

	For God's love, let me hear.

	Two nights together had these gentlemen,
	Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch,
	In the dead vast and middle of the night,
	Been thus encounter'd. A figure like your father,
	Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,
	Appears before them, and with solemn march
	Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk'd
	By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,
	Within his truncheon's length; whilst they, distilled
	Almost to jelly with the act of fear,
	Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me
	In dreadful secrecy impart they did;
	And I with them the third night kept the watch;
	Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,
	Form of the thing, each word made true and good,
	The apparition comes: I knew your father;
	These hands are not more like.

	But where was this?

	My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd.

	Did you not speak to it?

	My lord, I did;
	But answer made it none: yet once methought
	It lifted up its head and did address
	Itself to motion, like as it would speak;
	But even then the morning cock crew loud,
	And at the sound it shrunk in haste away,
	And vanish'd from our sight.

	'Tis very strange.

	As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true;
	And we did think it writ down in our duty
	To let you know of it.

	Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
	Hold you the watch to-night?


	We do, my lord.

	Arm'd, say you?


	Arm'd, my lord.

	From top to toe?


	My lord, from head to foot.

	Then saw you not his face?

	O, yes, my lord; he wore his beaver up.

	What, look'd he frowningly?

	A countenance more in sorrow than in anger.

	Pale or red?

	Nay, very pale.

	                  And fix'd his eyes upon you?

	Most constantly.

	                  I would I had been there.

	It would have much amazed you.

	Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?

	While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.


	Longer, longer.

	Not when I saw't.

	                  His beard was grizzled--no?

	It was, as I have seen it in his life,
	A sable silver'd.

	                  I will watch to-night;
	Perchance 'twill walk again.

	I warrant it will.

	If it assume my noble father's person,
	I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape
	And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,
	If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,
	Let it be tenable in your silence still;
	And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,
	Give it an understanding, but no tongue:
	I will requite your loves. So, fare you well:
	Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,
	I'll visit you.

	                  Our duty to your honour.

	Your loves, as mine to you: farewell.

	My father's spirit in arms! all is not well;
	I doubt some foul play: would the night were come!
	Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,
	Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.

	My necessaries are embark'd: farewell:
	And, sister, as the winds give benefit
	And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,
	But let me hear from you.

	Do you doubt that?

	For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour,
	Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,
	A violet in the youth of primy nature,
	Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,
	The perfume and suppliance of a minute; No more.

	       No more but so?

	Think it no more;
	For nature, crescent, does not grow alone
	In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,
	The inward service of the mind and soul
	Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,
	And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch
	The virtue of his will: but you must fear,
	His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own;
	For he himself is subject to his birth:
	He may not, as unvalued persons do,
	Carve for himself; for on his choice depends
	The safety and health of this whole state;
	And therefore must his choice be circumscribed
	Unto the voice and yielding of that body
	Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,
	It fits your wisdom so far to believe it
	As he in his particular act and place
	May give his saying deed; which is no further
	Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal.
	Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,
	If with too credent ear you list his songs,
	Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open
	To his unmaster'd importunity.
	Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,
	And keep you in the rear of your affection,
	Out of the shot and danger of desire.
	The chariest maid is prodigal enough,
	If she unmask her beauty to the moon:
	Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes:
	The canker galls the infants of the spring,
	Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,
	And in the morn and liquid dew of youth
	Contagious blastments are most imminent.
	Be wary then; best safety lies in fear:
	Youth to itself rebels, though none else near.

	I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,
	As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,
	Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,
	Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven;
	Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,
	Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,
	And recks not his own rede.

	O, fear me not.
	I stay too long: but here my father comes.

	A double blessing is a double grace,
	Occasion smiles upon a second leave.

	Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame!
	The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,
	And you are stay'd for. There; my blessing with thee!
	And these few precepts in thy memory
	See thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,
	Nor any unproportioned thought his act.
	Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar.
	Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,
	Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel;
	But do not dull thy palm with entertainment
	Of each new-hatch'd, unfledged comrade. Beware
	Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in,
	Bear't that the opposed may beware of thee.
	Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice;
	Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment.
	Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,
	But not express'd in fancy; rich, not gaudy;
	For the apparel oft proclaims the man,
	And they in France of the best rank and station
	Are of a most select and generous chief in that.
	Neither a borrower nor a lender be;
	For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
	And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
	This above all: to thine ownself be true,
	And it must follow, as the night the day,
	Thou canst not then be false to any man.
	Farewell: my blessing season this in thee!

	Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord.

	The time invites you; go; your servants tend.

	Farewell, Ophelia; and remember well
	What I have said to you.

	'Tis in my memory lock'd,
	And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

	Farewell.

	What is't, Ophelia, be hath said to you?

	So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet.

	Marry, well bethought:
	'Tis told me, he hath very oft of late
	Given private time to you; and you yourself
	Have of your audience been most free and bounteous:
	If it be so, as so 'tis put on me,
	And that in way of caution, I must tell you,
	You do not understand yourself so clearly
	As it behoves my daughter and your honour.
	What is between you? give me up the truth.

	He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
	Of his affection to me.

	Affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl,
	Unsifted in such perilous circumstance.
	Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?

	I do not know, my lord, what I should think.

	Marry, I'll teach you: think yourself a baby;
	That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,
	Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly;
	Or--not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,
	Running it thus--you'll tender me a fool.

	My lord, he hath importuned me with love
	In honourable fashion.

	Ay, fashion you may call it; go to, go to.

	And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,
	With almost all the holy vows of heaven.

	Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,
	When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul
	Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter,
	Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,
	Even in their promise, as it is a-making,
	You must not take for fire. From this time
	Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence;
	Set your entreatments at a higher rate
	Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
	Believe so much in him, that he is young
	And with a larger tether may he walk
	Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia,
	Do not believe his vows; for they are brokers,
	Not of that dye which their investments show,
	But mere implorators of unholy suits,
	Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,
	The better to beguile. This is for all:
	I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,
	Have you so slander any moment leisure,
	As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet.
	Look to't, I charge you: come your ways.

	I shall obey, my lord.

	The air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.

	It is a nipping and an eager air.

	What hour now?

	                  I think it lacks of twelve.

	No, it is struck.

	Indeed? I heard it not: then it draws near the season
	Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.

	What does this mean, my lord?

	The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,
	Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels;
	And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,
	The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out
	The triumph of his pledge.

	Is it a custom?

	Ay, marry, is't:
	But to my mind, though I am native here
	And to the manner born, it is a custom
	More honour'd in the breach than the observance.
	This heavy-headed revel east and west
	Makes us traduced and tax'd of other nations:
	They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase
	Soil our addition; and indeed it takes
	From our achievements, though perform'd at height,
	The pith and marrow of our attribute.
	So, oft it chances in particular men,
	That for some vicious mole of nature in them,
	As, in their birth--wherein they are not guilty,
	Since nature cannot choose his origin--
	By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,
	Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,
	Or by some habit that too much o'er-leavens
	The form of plausive manners, that these men,
	Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,
	Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,--
	Their virtues else--be they as pure as grace,
	As infinite as man may undergo--
	Shall in the general censure take corruption
	From that particular fault: the dram of eale
	Doth all the noble substance of a doubt
	To his own scandal.

	Look, my lord, it comes!

	Angels and ministers of grace defend us!
	Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,
	Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,
	Be thy intents wicked or charitable,
	Thou comest in such a questionable shape
	That I will speak to thee: I'll call thee Hamlet,
	King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!
	Let me not burst in ignorance; but tell
	Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,
	Have burst their cerements; why the sepulchre,
	Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,
	Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws,
	To cast thee up again. What may this mean,
	That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel
	Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon,
	Making night hideous; and we fools of nature
	So horridly to shake our disposition
	With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
	Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?

	It beckons you to go away with it,
	As if it some impartment did desire
	To you alone.

	                  Look, with what courteous action
	It waves you to a more removed ground:
	But do not go with it.

	No, by no means.

	It will not speak; then I will follow it.

	Do not, my lord.

	                  Why, what should be the fear?
	I do not set my life in a pin's fee;
	And for my soul, what can it do to that,
	Being a thing immortal as itself?
	It waves me forth again: I'll follow it.

	What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,
	Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff
	That beetles o'er his base into the sea,
	And there assume some other horrible form,
	Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason
	And draw you into madness? think of it:
	The very place puts toys of desperation,
	Without more motive, into every brain
	That looks so many fathoms to the sea
	And hears it roar beneath.

	It waves me still.
	Go on; I'll follow thee.

	You shall not go, my lord.

	Hold off your hands.

	Be ruled; you shall not go.

	My fate cries out,
	And makes each petty artery in this body
	As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve.
	Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen.
	By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!
	I say, away! Go on; I'll follow thee.

	He waxes desperate with imagination.

	Let's follow; 'tis not fit thus to obey him.

	Have after. To what issue will this come?

	Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.

	Heaven will direct it.

	Nay, let's follow him.

	Where wilt thou lead me? speak; I'll go no further.

	Mark me.

	       I will.

	                  My hour is almost come,
	When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames
	Must render up myself.

	Alas, poor ghost!

	Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing
	To what I shall unfold.

	Speak; I am bound to hear.

	 So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear.

	What?

	I am thy father's spirit,
	Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,
	And for the day confined to fast in fires,
	Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature
	Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid
	To tell the secrets of my prison-house,
	I could a tale unfold whose lightest word
	Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
	Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,
	Thy knotted and combined locks to part
	And each particular hair to stand on end,
	Like quills upon the fretful porpentine:
	But this eternal blazon must not be
	To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!
	If thou didst ever thy dear father love--

	O God!

	Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.

	Murder!

	Murder most foul, as in the best it is;
	But this most foul, strange and unnatural.

	Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift
	As meditation or the thoughts of love,
	May sweep to my revenge.

	I find thee apt;
	And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed
	That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,
	Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear:
	'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,
	A serpent stung me; so the whole ear of Denmark
	Is by a forged process of my death
	Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth,
	The serpent that did sting thy father's life
	Now wears his crown.

	O my prophetic soul! My uncle!

	Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,
	With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts,--
	O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power
	So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust
	The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen:
	O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!
	From me, whose love was of that dignity
	That it went hand in hand even with the vow
	I made to her in marriage, and to decline
	Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor
	To those of mine!
	But virtue, as it never will be moved,
	Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,
	So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,
	Will sate itself in a celestial bed,
	And prey on garbage.
	But, soft! methinks I scent the morning air;
	Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,
	My custom always of the afternoon,
	Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,
	With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,
	And in the porches of my ears did pour
	The leperous distilment; whose effect
	Holds such an enmity with blood of man
	That swift as quicksilver it courses through
	The natural gates and alleys of the body,
	And with a sudden vigour doth posset
	And curd, like eager droppings into milk,
	The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine;
	And a most instant tetter bark'd about,
	Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,
	All my smooth body.
	Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand
	Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd:
	Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
	Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd,
	No reckoning made, but sent to my account
	With all my imperfections on my head:
	O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!
	If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not;
	Let not the royal bed of Denmark be
	A couch for luxury and damned incest.
	But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,
	Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive
	Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven
	And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,
	To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!
	The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,
	And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire:
	Adieu, adieu! Hamlet, remember me.

	O all you host of heaven! O earth! what else?
	And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart;
	And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,
	But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee!
	Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat
	In this distracted globe. Remember thee!
	Yea, from the table of my memory
	I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,
	All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,
	That youth and observation copied there;
	And thy commandment all alone shall live
	Within the book and volume of my brain,
	Unmix'd with baser matter: yes, by heaven!
	O most pernicious woman!
	O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!
	My tables,--meet it is I set it down,
	That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain;
	At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark:

	So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word;
	It is 'Adieu, adieu! remember me.'
	I have sworn 't.


	My lord, my lord,--

	Lord Hamlet,--

	Heaven secure him!

	So be it!

	Hillo, ho, ho, my lord!

	Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come.

	How is't, my noble lord?

	What news, my lord?

	O, wonderful!

	                  Good my lord, tell it.

	No; you'll reveal it.

	Not I, my lord, by heaven.

	Nor I, my lord.

	How say you, then; would heart of man once think it?
	But you'll be secret?


	Ay, by heaven, my lord.

	There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark
	But he's an arrant knave.

	There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave
	To tell us this.

	                  Why, right; you are i' the right;
	And so, without more circumstance at all,
	I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:
	You, as your business and desire shall point you;
	For every man has business and desire,
	Such as it is; and for mine own poor part,
	Look you, I'll go pray.

	These are but wild and whirling words, my lord.

	I'm sorry they offend you, heartily;
	Yes, 'faith heartily.

	There's no offence, my lord.

	Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,
	And much offence too. Touching this vision here,
	It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you:
	For your desire to know what is between us,
	O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,
	As you are friends, scholars and soldiers,
	Give me one poor request.

	What is't, my lord? we will.

	Never make known what you have seen to-night.


	My lord, we will not.

	Nay, but swear't.

	In faith,
	My lord, not I.

	                  Nor I, my lord, in faith.

	Upon my sword.

	                  We have sworn, my lord, already.

	Indeed, upon my sword, indeed.

	Swear.

	Ah, ha, boy! say'st thou so? art thou there,
	truepenny?
	Come on--you hear this fellow in the cellarage--
	Consent to swear.

	                  Propose the oath, my lord.

	Never to speak of this that you have seen,
	Swear by my sword.

	Swear.

	Hic et ubique? then we'll shift our ground.
	Come hither, gentlemen,
	And lay your hands again upon my sword:
	Never to speak of this that you have heard,
	Swear by my sword.

	Swear.

	Well said, old mole! canst work i' the earth so fast?
	A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends.

	O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!

	And therefore as a stranger give it welcome.
	There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
	Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come;
	Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,
	How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself,
	As I perchance hereafter shall think meet
	To put an antic disposition on,
	That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,
	With arms encumber'd thus, or this headshake,
	Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,
	As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'
	Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'
	Or such ambiguous giving out, to note
	That you know aught of me: this not to do,
	So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear.

	Swear.

	Rest, rest, perturbed spirit!

		        So, gentlemen,
	With all my love I do commend me to you:
	And what so poor a man as Hamlet is
	May do, to express his love and friending to you,
	God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together;
	And still your fingers on your lips, I pray.
	The time is out of joint: O cursed spite,
	That ever I was born to set it right!
	Nay, come, let's go together.

	Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo.

	I will, my lord.

	You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,
	Before you visit him, to make inquire
	Of his behavior.

	                  My lord, I did intend it.

	Marry, well said; very well said. Look you, sir,
	Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris;
	And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,
	What company, at what expense; and finding
	By this encompassment and drift of question
	That they do know my son, come you more nearer
	Than your particular demands will touch it:
	Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him;
	As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,
	And in part him: ' do you mark this, Reynaldo?

	Ay, very well, my lord.

	'And in part him; but' you may say 'not well:
	But, if't be he I mean, he's very wild;
	Addicted so and so:' and there put on him
	What forgeries you please; marry, none so rank
	As may dishonour him; take heed of that;
	But, sir, such wanton, wild and usual slips
	As are companions noted and most known
	To youth and liberty.

	As gaming, my lord.

	Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,
	Drabbing: you may go so far.

	My lord, that would dishonour him.

	'Faith, no; as you may season it in the charge
	You must not put another scandal on him,
	That he is open to incontinency;
	That's not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly
	That they may seem the taints of liberty,
	The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,
	A savageness in unreclaimed blood,
	Of general assault.

	But, my good lord,--

	Wherefore should you do this?

	Ay, my lord,
	I would know that.

	                  Marry, sir, here's my drift;
	And I believe, it is a fetch of wit:
	You laying these slight sullies on my son,
	As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' the working, Mark you,
	Your party in converse, him you would sound,
	Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes
	The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured
	He closes with you in this consequence;
	'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman,'
	According to the phrase or the addition
	Of man and country.

	Very good, my lord.

	And then, sir, does he this--he does--what was I
	about to say? By the mass, I was about to say
	something: where did I leave?

	At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,'
	and 'gentleman.'

	At 'closes in the consequence,' ay, marry;
	He closes thus: 'I know the gentleman;
	I saw him yesterday, or t' other day,
	Or then, or then; with such, or such; and, as you say,
	There was a' gaming; there o'ertook in's rouse;
	There falling out at tennis:' or perchance,
	'I saw him enter such a house of sale,'
	Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth.
	See you now;
	Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth:
	And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,
	With windlasses and with assays of bias,
	By indirections find directions out:
	So by my former lecture and advice,
	Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?

	My lord, I have.

	                  God be wi' you; fare you well.

	Good my lord!

	Observe his inclination in yourself.

	I shall, my lord.

	And let him ply his music.

	Well, my lord.

	Farewell!

	How now, Ophelia! what's the matter?

	O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!

	With what, i' the name of God?

	My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,
	Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced;
	No hat upon his head; his stockings foul'd,
	Ungarter'd, and down-gyved to his ancle;
	Pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other;
	And with a look so piteous in purport
	As if he had been loosed out of hell
	To speak of horrors,--he comes before me.

	Mad for thy love?

	                  My lord, I do not know;
	But truly, I do fear it.

	What said he?

	He took me by the wrist and held me hard;
	Then goes he to the length of all his arm;
	And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,
	He falls to such perusal of my face
	As he would draw it. Long stay'd he so;
	At last, a little shaking of mine arm
	And thrice his head thus waving up and down,
	He raised a sigh so piteous and profound
	As it did seem to shatter all his bulk
	And end his being: that done, he lets me go:
	And, with his head over his shoulder turn'd,
	He seem'd to find his way without his eyes;
	For out o' doors he went without their helps,
	And, to the last, bended their light on me.

	Come, go with me: I will go seek the king.
	This is the very ecstasy of love,
	Whose violent property fordoes itself
	And leads the will to desperate undertakings
	As oft as any passion under heaven
	That does afflict our natures. I am sorry.
	What, have you given him any hard words of late?

	No, my good lord, but, as you did command,
	I did repel his fetters and denied
	His access to me.

	                  That hath made him mad.
	I am sorry that with better heed and judgment
	I had not quoted him: I fear'd he did but trifle,
	And meant to wreck thee; but, beshrew my jealousy!
	By heaven, it is as proper to our age
	To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions
	As it is common for the younger sort
	To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king:
	This must be known; which, being kept close, might
	move
	More grief to hide than hate to utter love.

	Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern!
	Moreover that we much did long to see you,
	The need we have to use you did provoke
	Our hasty sending. Something have you heard
	Of Hamlet's transformation; so call it,
	Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man
	Resembles that it was. What it should be,
	More than his father's death, that thus hath put him
	So much from the understanding of himself,
	I cannot dream of: I entreat you both,
	That, being of so young days brought up with him,
	And sith so neighbour'd to his youth and havior,
	That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court
	Some little time: so by your companies
	To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather,
	So much as from occasion you may glean,
	Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus,
	That, open'd, lies within our remedy.

	Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you;
	And sure I am two men there are not living
	To whom he more adheres. If it will please you
	To show us so much gentry and good will
	As to expend your time with us awhile,
	For the supply and profit of our hope,
	Your visitation shall receive such thanks
	As fits a king's remembrance.

	Both your majesties
	Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,
	Put your dread pleasures more into command
	Than to entreaty.

	                  But we both obey,
	And here give up ourselves, in the full bent
	To lay our service freely at your feet,
	To be commanded.

	Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern.

	Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz:
	And I beseech you instantly to visit
	My too much changed son. Go, some of you,
	And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is.

	Heavens make our presence and our practises
	Pleasant and helpful to him!

	Ay, amen!

	The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,
	Are joyfully return'd.

	Thou still hast been the father of good news.

	Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege,
	I hold my duty, as I hold my soul,
	Both to my God and to my gracious king:
	And I do think, or else this brain of mine
	Hunts not the trail of policy so sure
	As it hath used to do, that I have found
	The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy.

	O, speak of that; that do I long to hear.

	Give first admittance to the ambassadors;
	My news shall be the fruit to that great feast.

	Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.

	He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found
	The head and source of all your son's distemper.

	I doubt it is no other but the main;
	His father's death, and our o'erhasty marriage.

	Well, we shall sift him.

		   Welcome, my good friends!
	Say, Voltimand, what from our brother Norway?

	Most fair return of greetings and desires.
	Upon our first, he sent out to suppress
	His nephew's levies; which to him appear'd
	To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack;
	But, better look'd into, he truly found
	It was against your highness: whereat grieved,
	That so his sickness, age and impotence
	Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests
	On Fortinbras; which he, in brief, obeys;
	Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine
	Makes vow before his uncle never more
	To give the assay of arms against your majesty.
	Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,
	Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,
	And his commission to employ those soldiers,
	So levied as before, against the Polack:
	With an entreaty, herein further shown,

	That it might please you to give quiet pass
	Through your dominions for this enterprise,
	On such regards of safety and allowance
	As therein are set down.

	It likes us well;
	And at our more consider'd time well read,
	Answer, and think upon this business.
	Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour:
	Go to your rest; at night we'll feast together:
	Most welcome home!

	                  This business is well ended.
	My liege, and madam, to expostulate
	What majesty should be, what duty is,
	Why day is day, night night, and time is time,
	Were nothing but to waste night, day and time.
	Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,
	And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,
	I will be brief: your noble son is mad:
	Mad call I it; for, to define true madness,
	What is't but to be nothing else but mad?
	But let that go.

	                  More matter, with less art.

	Madam, I swear I use no art at all.
	That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity;
	And pity 'tis 'tis true: a foolish figure;
	But farewell it, for I will use no art.
	Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains
	That we find out the cause of this effect,
	Or rather say, the cause of this defect,
	For this effect defective comes by cause:
	Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend.
	I have a daughter--have while she is mine--
	Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,
	Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise.

	'To the celestial and my soul's idol, the most
	beautified Ophelia,'--
	That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase; 'beautified' is
	a vile phrase: but you shall hear. Thus:

	'In her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'

	Came this from Hamlet to her?

	Good madam, stay awhile; I will be faithful.

	'Doubt thou the stars are fire;
	Doubt that the sun doth move;
	Doubt truth to be a liar;
	But never doubt I love.
	'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers;
	I have not art to reckon my groans: but that
	I love thee best, O most best, believe it. Adieu.
	'Thine evermore most dear lady, whilst
	this machine is to him, Hamlet.'
	This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,
	And more above, hath his solicitings,
	As they fell out by time, by means and place,
	All given to mine ear.

	But how hath she
	Received his love?

	                  What do you think of me?

	As of a man faithful and honourable.

	I would fain prove so. But what might you think,
	When I had seen this hot love on the wing--
	As I perceived it, I must tell you that,
	Before my daughter told me--what might you,
	Or my dear majesty your queen here, think,
	If I had play'd the desk or table-book,
	Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,
	Or look'd upon this love with idle sight;
	What might you think? No, I went round to work,
	And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:
	'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star;
	This must not be:' and then I precepts gave her,
	That she should lock herself from his resort,
	Admit no messengers, receive no tokens.
	Which done, she took the fruits of my advice;
	And he, repulsed--a short tale to make--
	Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,
	Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,
	Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,
	Into the madness wherein now he raves,
	And all we mourn for.

	Do you think 'tis this?

	It may be, very likely.

	Hath there been such a time--I'd fain know that--
	That I have positively said 'Tis so,'
	When it proved otherwise?

	Not that I know.

	Take this from this, if this be otherwise:
	If circumstances lead me, I will find
	Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed
	Within the centre.

	                  How may we try it further?

	You know, sometimes he walks four hours together
	Here in the lobby.

	                  So he does indeed.

	At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him:
	Be you and I behind an arras then;
	Mark the encounter: if he love her not
	And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,
	Let me be no assistant for a state,
	But keep a farm and carters.

	We will try it.

	But, look, where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.

	Away, I do beseech you, both away:
	I'll board him presently.

		    O, give me leave:
	How does my good Lord Hamlet?

	Well, God-a-mercy.

	Do you know me, my lord?

	Excellent well; you are a fishmonger.

	Not I, my lord.

	Then I would you were so honest a man.

	Honest, my lord!

	Ay, sir; to be honest, as this world goes, is to be
	one man picked out of ten thousand.

	That's very true, my lord.

	For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a
	god kissing carrion,--Have you a daughter?

	I have, my lord.

	Let her not walk i' the sun: conception is a
	blessing: but not as your daughter may conceive.
	Friend, look to 't.

	How say you by that? Still harping on my
	daughter: yet he knew me not at first; he said I
	was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and
	truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for
	love; very near this. I'll speak to him again.
	What do you read, my lord?

	Words, words, words.

	What is the matter, my lord?

	Between who?

	I mean, the matter that you read, my lord.

	Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here
	that old men have grey beards, that their faces are
	wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and
	plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of
	wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir,
	though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet
	I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for
	yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab
	you could go backward.

	Though this be madness, yet there is method
	in 't. Will you walk out of the air, my lord?

	Into my grave.

	Indeed, that is out o' the air.

	How pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness
	that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity
	could not so prosperously be delivered of. I will
	leave him, and suddenly contrive the means of
	meeting between him and my daughter.--My honourable
	lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you.

	You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that I will
	more willingly part withal: except my life, except
	my life, except my life.

	Fare you well, my lord.

	These tedious old fools!

	You go to seek the Lord Hamlet; there he is.

	God save you, sir!

	My honoured lord!

	My most dear lord!

	My excellent good friends! How dost thou,
	Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?

	As the indifferent children of the earth.

	Happy, in that we are not over-happy;
	On fortune's cap we are not the very button.

	Nor the soles of her shoe?

	Neither, my lord.

	Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of
	her favours?

	'Faith, her privates we.

	In the secret parts of fortune? O, most true; she
	is a strumpet. What's the news?

	None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.

	Then is doomsday near: but your news is not true.
	Let me question more in particular: what have you,
	my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune,
	that she sends you to prison hither?

	Prison, my lord!

	Denmark's a prison.

	Then is the world one.

	A goodly one; in which there are many confines,
	wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o' the worst.

	We think not so, my lord.

	Why, then, 'tis none to you; for there is nothing
	either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me
	it is a prison.

	Why then, your ambition makes it one; 'tis too
	narrow for your mind.

	O God, I could be bounded in a nut shell and count
	myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I
	have bad dreams.

	Which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very
	substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.

	A dream itself is but a shadow.

	Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a
	quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.

	Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and
	outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we
	to the court? for, by my fay, I cannot reason.


	We'll wait upon you.

	No such matter: I will not sort you with the rest
	of my servants, for, to speak to you like an honest
	man, I am most dreadfully attended. But, in the
	beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?

	To visit you, my lord; no other occasion.

	Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks; but I
	thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are
	too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for? Is it
	your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
	deal justly with me: come, come; nay, speak.

	What should we say, my lord?

	Why, any thing, but to the purpose. You were sent
	for; and there is a kind of confession in your looks
	which your modesties have not craft enough to colour:
	I know the good king and queen have sent for you.

	To what end, my lord?

	That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by
	the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of
	our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved
	love, and by what more dear a better proposer could
	charge you withal, be even and direct with me,
	whether you were sent for, or no?

	What say you?

	Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If you
	love me, hold not off.

	My lord, we were sent for.

	I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
	prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king
	and queen moult no feather. I have of late--but
	wherefore I know not--lost all my mirth, forgone all
	custom of exercises; and indeed it goes so heavily
	with my disposition that this goodly frame, the
	earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most
	excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave
	o'erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted
	with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to
	me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours.
	What a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason!
	how infinite in faculty! in form and moving how
	express and admirable! in action how like an angel!
	in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the
	world! the paragon of animals! And yet, to me,
	what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not
	me: no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling
	you seem to say so.

	My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.

	Why did you laugh then, when I said 'man delights not me'?

	To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what
	lenten entertainment the players shall receive from
	you: we coted them on the way; and hither are they
	coming, to offer you service.

	He that plays the king shall be welcome; his majesty
	shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight
	shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not
	sigh gratis; the humourous man shall end his part
	in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose
	lungs are tickled o' the sere; and the lady shall
	say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt
	for't. What players are they?

	Even those you were wont to take delight in, the
	tragedians of the city.

	How chances it they travel? their residence, both
	in reputation and profit, was better both ways.

	I think their inhibition comes by the means of the
	late innovation.

	Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was
	in the city? are they so followed?

	No, indeed, are they not.

	How comes it? do they grow rusty?

	Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace: but
	there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases,
	that cry out on the top of question, and are most
	tyrannically clapped for't: these are now the
	fashion, and so berattle the common stages--so they
	call them--that many wearing rapiers are afraid of
	goose-quills and dare scarce come thither.

	What, are they children? who maintains 'em? how are
	they escoted? Will they pursue the quality no
	longer than they can sing? will they not say
	afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
	players--as it is most like, if their means are no
	better--their writers do them wrong, to make them
	exclaim against their own succession?

	'Faith, there has been much to do on both sides; and
	the nation holds it no sin to tarre them to
	controversy: there was, for a while, no money bid
	for argument, unless the poet and the player went to
	cuffs in the question.

	Is't possible?

	O, there has been much throwing about of brains.

	Do the boys carry it away?

	Ay, that they do, my lord; Hercules and his load too.

	It is not very strange; for mine uncle is king of
	Denmark, and those that would make mows at him while
	my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an
	hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little.
	'Sblood, there is something in this more than
	natural, if philosophy could find it out.

	There are the players.

	Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands,
	come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion
	and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb,
	lest my extent to the players, which, I tell you,
	must show fairly outward, should more appear like
	entertainment than yours. You are welcome: but my
	uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.

	In what, my dear lord?

	I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is
	southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.

	Well be with you, gentlemen!

	Hark you, Guildenstern; and you too: at each ear a
	hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet
	out of his swaddling-clouts.

	Happily he's the second time come to them; for they
	say an old man is twice a child.

	I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players;
	mark it. You say right, sir: o' Monday morning;
	'twas so indeed.

	My lord, I have news to tell you.

	My lord, I have news to tell you.
	When Roscius was an actor in Rome,--

	The actors are come hither, my lord.

	Buz, buz!

	Upon mine honour,--

	Then came each actor on his ass,--

	The best actors in the world, either for tragedy,
	comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
	historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-
	comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or
	poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
	Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the
	liberty, these are the only men.

	O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!

	What a treasure had he, my lord?

	Why,
	'One fair daughter and no more,
	The which he loved passing well.'

	Still on my daughter.

	Am I not i' the right, old Jephthah?

	If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter
	that I love passing well.

	Nay, that follows not.

	What follows, then, my lord?

	Why,
	'As by lot, God wot,'
	and then, you know,
	'It came to pass, as most like it was,'--
	the first row of the pious chanson will show you
	more; for look, where my abridgement comes.

	You are welcome, masters; welcome, all. I am glad
	to see thee well. Welcome, good friends. O, my old
	friend! thy face is valenced since I saw thee last:
	comest thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young
	lady and mistress! By'r lady, your ladyship is
	nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by the
	altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like
	apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the
	ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en
	to't like French falconers, fly at any thing we see:
	we'll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste
	of your quality; come, a passionate speech.

	What speech, my lord?

	I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was
	never acted; or, if it was, not above once; for the
	play, I remember, pleased not the million; 'twas
	caviare to the general: but it was--as I received
	it, and others, whose judgments in such matters
	cried in the top of mine--an excellent play, well
	digested in the scenes, set down with as much
	modesty as cunning. I remember, one said there
	were no sallets in the lines to make the matter
	savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might
	indict the author of affectation; but called it an
	honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very
	much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I
	chiefly loved: 'twas Aeneas' tale to Dido; and
	thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of
	Priam's slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin
	at this line: let me see, let me see--
	'The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,'--
	it is not so:--it begins with Pyrrhus:--
	'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,
	Black as his purpose, did the night resemble
	When he lay couched in the ominous horse,
	Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd
	With heraldry more dismal; head to foot
	Now is he total gules; horridly trick'd
	With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,
	Baked and impasted with the parching streets,
	That lend a tyrannous and damned light
	To their lord's murder: roasted in wrath and fire,
	And thus o'er-sized with coagulate gore,
	With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus
	Old grandsire Priam seeks.'
	So, proceed you.

	'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and
	good discretion.

	'Anon he finds him
	Striking too short at Greeks; his antique sword,
	Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,
	Repugnant to command: unequal match'd,
	Pyrrhus at Priam drives; in rage strikes wide;
	But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword
	The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,
	Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top
	Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash
	Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear: for, lo! his sword,
	Which was declining on the milky head
	Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' the air to stick:
	So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,
	And like a neutral to his will and matter,
	Did nothing.
	But, as we often see, against some storm,
	A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,
	The bold winds speechless and the orb below
	As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder
	Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus' pause,
	Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work;
	And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall
	On Mars's armour forged for proof eterne
	With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword
	Now falls on Priam.
	Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune! All you gods,
	In general synod 'take away her power;
	Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,
	And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
	As low as to the fiends!'

	This is too long.

	It shall to the barber's, with your beard. Prithee,
	say on: he's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he
	sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba.

	'But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen--'

	'The mobled queen?'

	That's good; 'mobled queen' is good.

	'Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames
	With bisson rheum; a clout upon that head
	Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,
	About her lank and all o'er-teemed loins,
	A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up;
	Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd,
	'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have
	pronounced:
	But if the gods themselves did see her then
	When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport
	In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,
	The instant burst of clamour that she made,
	Unless things mortal move them not at all,
	Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven,
	And passion in the gods.'

	Look, whether he has not turned his colour and has
	tears in's eyes. Pray you, no more.

	'Tis well: I'll have thee speak out the rest soon.
	Good my lord, will you see the players well
	bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used; for
	they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the
	time: after your death you were better have a bad
	epitaph than their ill report while you live.

	My lord, I will use them according to their desert.

	God's bodykins, man, much better: use every man
	after his desert, and who should 'scape whipping?
	Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less
	they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty.
	Take them in.

	Come, sirs.

	Follow him, friends: we'll hear a play to-morrow.

	Dost thou hear me, old friend; can you play the
	Murder of Gonzago?

	Ay, my lord.

	We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need,
	study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which
	I would set down and insert in't, could you not?

	Ay, my lord.

	Very well. Follow that lord; and look you mock him
	not.

	My good friends, I'll leave you till night: you are
	welcome to Elsinore.

	Good my lord!

	Ay, so, God be wi' ye;

		  Now I am alone.
	O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!
	Is it not monstrous that this player here,
	But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
	Could force his soul so to his own conceit
	That from her working all his visage wann'd,
	Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,
	A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
	With forms to his conceit? and all for nothing!
	For Hecuba!
	What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,
	That he should weep for her? What would he do,
	Had he the motive and the cue for passion
	That I have? He would drown the stage with tears
	And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,
	Make mad the guilty and appal the free,
	Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed
	The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,
	A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak,
	Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,
	And can say nothing; no, not for a king,
	Upon whose property and most dear life
	A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward?
	Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?
	Plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face?
	Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' the throat,
	As deep as to the lungs? who does me this?
	Ha!
	'Swounds, I should take it: for it cannot be
	But I am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall
	To make oppression bitter, or ere this
	I should have fatted all the region kites
	With this slave's offal: bloody, bawdy villain!
	Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!
	O, vengeance!
	Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,
	That I, the son of a dear father murder'd,
	Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,
	Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,
	And fall a-cursing, like a very drab,
	A scullion!
	Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! I have heard
	That guilty creatures sitting at a play
	Have by the very cunning of the scene
	Been struck so to the soul that presently
	They have proclaim'd their malefactions;
	For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak
	With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players
	Play something like the murder of my father
	Before mine uncle: I'll observe his looks;
	I'll tent him to the quick: if he but blench,
	I know my course. The spirit that I have seen
	May be the devil: and the devil hath power
	To assume a pleasing shape; yea, and perhaps
	Out of my weakness and my melancholy,
	As he is very potent with such spirits,
	Abuses me to damn me: I'll have grounds
	More relative than this: the play 's the thing
	Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the king.

	And can you, by no drift of circumstance,
	Get from him why he puts on this confusion,
	Grating so harshly all his days of quiet
	With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?

	He does confess he feels himself distracted;
	But from what cause he will by no means speak.

	Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,
	But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof,
	When we would bring him on to some confession
	Of his true state.

	                  Did he receive you well?

	Most like a gentleman.

	But with much forcing of his disposition.

	Niggard of question; but, of our demands,
	Most free in his reply.

	Did you assay him?
	To any pastime?

	Madam, it so fell out, that certain players
	We o'er-raught on the way: of these we told him;
	And there did seem in him a kind of joy
	To hear of it: they are about the court,
	And, as I think, they have already order
	This night to play before him.

	'Tis most true:
	And he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties
	To hear and see the matter.

	With all my heart; and it doth much content me
	To hear him so inclined.
	Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,
	And drive his purpose on to these delights.

	We shall, my lord.

	                  Sweet Gertrude, leave us too;
	For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,
	That he, as 'twere by accident, may here
	Affront Ophelia:
	Her father and myself, lawful espials,
	Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing, unseen,
	We may of their encounter frankly judge,
	And gather by him, as he is behaved,
	If 't be the affliction of his love or no
	That thus he suffers for.

	I shall obey you.
	And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish
	That your good beauties be the happy cause
	Of Hamlet's wildness: so shall I hope your virtues
	Will bring him to his wonted way again,
	To both your honours.

	Madam, I wish it may.

	Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious, so please you,
	We will bestow ourselves.

		    Read on this book;
	That show of such an exercise may colour
	Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this,--
	'Tis too much proved--that with devotion's visage
	And pious action we do sugar o'er
	The devil himself.

	O, 'tis too true!
	How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!
	The harlot's cheek, beautied with plastering art,
	Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it
	Than is my deed to my most painted word:
	O heavy burthen!

	I hear him coming: let's withdraw, my lord.

	To be, or not to be: that is the question:
	Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
	The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
	Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
	And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep;
	No more; and by a sleep to say we end
	The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks
	That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation
	Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep;
	To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub;
	For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
	When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
	Must give us pause: there's the respect
	That makes calamity of so long life;
	For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
	The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
	The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
	The insolence of office and the spurns
	That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
	When he himself might his quietus make
	With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear,
	To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
	But that the dread of something after death,
	The undiscover'd country from whose bourn
	No traveller returns, puzzles the will
	And makes us rather bear those ills we have
	Than fly to others that we know not of?
	Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;
	And thus the native hue of resolution
	Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
	And enterprises of great pith and moment
	With this regard their currents turn awry,
	And lose the name of action.--Soft you now!
	The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons
	Be all my sins remember'd.

	Good my lord,
	How does your honour for this many a day?

	I humbly thank you; well, well, well.

	My lord, I have remembrances of yours,
	That I have longed long to re-deliver;
	I pray you, now receive them.

	No, not I;
	I never gave you aught.

	My honour'd lord, you know right well you did;
	And, with them, words of so sweet breath composed
	As made the things more rich: their perfume lost,
	Take these again; for to the noble mind
	Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind.
	There, my lord.

	Ha, ha! are you honest?

	My lord?

	Are you fair?

	What means your lordship?

	That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should
	admit no discourse to your beauty.

	Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than
	with honesty?

	Ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner
	transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the
	force of honesty can translate beauty into his
	likeness: this was sometime a paradox, but now the
	time gives it proof. I did love you once.

	Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.

	You should not have believed me; for virtue cannot
	so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of
	it: I loved you not.

	I was the more deceived.

	Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a
	breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest;
	but yet I could accuse me of such things that it
	were better my mother had not borne me: I am very
	proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at
	my beck than I have thoughts to put them in,
	imagination to give them shape, or time to act them
	in. What should such fellows as I do crawling
	between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves,
	all; believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery.
	Where's your father?

	At home, my lord.

	Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the
	fool no where but in's own house. Farewell.

	O, help him, you sweet heavens!

	If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for
	thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as
	snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a
	nunnery, go: farewell. Or, if thou wilt needs
	marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough
	what monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go,
	and quickly too. Farewell.

	O heavenly powers, restore him!

	I have heard of your paintings too, well enough; God
	has given you one face, and you make yourselves
	another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and
	nick-name God's creatures, and make your wantonness
	your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on't; it hath
	made me mad. I say, we will have no more marriages:
	those that are married already, all but one, shall
	live; the rest shall keep as they are. To a
	nunnery, go.

	O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!
	The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword;
	The expectancy and rose of the fair state,
	The glass of fashion and the mould of form,
	The observed of all observers, quite, quite down!
	And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,
	That suck'd the honey of his music vows,
	Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,
	Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh;
	That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth
	Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me,
	To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!

	Love! his affections do not that way tend;
	Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,
	Was not like madness. There's something in his soul,
	O'er which his melancholy sits on brood;
	And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose
	Will be some danger: which for to prevent,
	I have in quick determination
	Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England,
	For the demand of our neglected tribute
	Haply the seas and countries different
	With variable objects shall expel
	This something-settled matter in his heart,
	Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
	From fashion of himself. What think you on't?

	It shall do well: but yet do I believe
	The origin and commencement of his grief
	Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia!
	You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said;
	We heard it all. My lord, do as you please;
	But, if you hold it fit, after the play
	Let his queen mother all alone entreat him
	To show his grief: let her be round with him;
	And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear
	Of all their conference. If she find him not,
	To England send him, or confine him where
	Your wisdom best shall think.

	It shall be so:
	Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go.

	Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to
	you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it,
	as many of your players do, I had as lief the
	town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air
	too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently;
	for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,
	the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget
	a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it
	offends me to the soul to hear a robustious
	periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to
	very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who
	for the most part are capable of nothing but
	inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such
	a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant; it
	out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it.

	I warrant your honour.

	Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion
	be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the
	word to the action; with this special o'erstep not
	the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is
	from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the
	first and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the
	mirror up to nature; to show virtue her own feature,
	scorn her own image, and the very age and body of
	the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone,
	or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful
	laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve; the
	censure of the which one must in your allowance
	o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be
	players that I have seen play, and heard others
	praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely,
	that, neither having the accent of Christians nor
	the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so
	strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of
	nature's journeymen had made men and not made them
	well, they imitated humanity so abominably.

	I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us,
	sir.

	O, reform it altogether. And let those that play
	your clowns speak no more than is set down for them;
	for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to
	set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh
	too; though, in the mean time, some necessary
	question of the play be then to be considered:
	that's villanous, and shows a most pitiful ambition
	in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready.

	How now, my lord! I will the king hear this piece of work?

	And the queen too, and that presently.

	Bid the players make haste.

	Will you two help to hasten them?


	We will, my lord.

	What ho! Horatio!

	Here, sweet lord, at your service.

	Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man
	As e'er my conversation coped withal.

	O, my dear lord,--

	                  Nay, do not think I flatter;
	For what advancement may I hope from thee
	That no revenue hast but thy good spirits,
	To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?
	No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,
	And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee
	Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?
	Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice
	And could of men distinguish, her election
	Hath seal'd thee for herself; for thou hast been
	As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing,
	A man that fortune's buffets and rewards
	Hast ta'en with equal thanks: and blest are those
	Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled,
	That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger
	To sound what stop she please. Give me that man
	That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him
	In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,
	As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--
	There is a play to-night before the king;
	One scene of it comes near the circumstance
	Which I have told thee of my father's death:
	I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,
	Even with the very comment of thy soul
	Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt
	Do not itself unkennel in one speech,
	It is a damned ghost that we have seen,
	And my imaginations are as foul
	As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note;
	For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,
	And after we will both our judgments join
	In censure of his seeming.

	Well, my lord:
	If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,
	And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft.

	They are coming to the play; I must be idle:
	Get you a place.

	How fares our cousin Hamlet?

	Excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish: I eat
	the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so.

	I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet; these words
	are not mine.

	No, nor mine now.

	My lord, you played once i' the university, you say?

	That did I, my lord; and was accounted a good actor.

	What did you enact?

	I did enact Julius Caesar: I was killed i' the
	Capitol; Brutus killed me.

	It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf
	there. Be the players ready?

	Ay, my lord; they stay upon your patience.

	Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me.

	No, good mother, here's metal more attractive.

	O, ho! do you mark that?

	Lady, shall I lie in your lap?

	No, my lord.

	I mean, my head upon your lap?

	Ay, my lord.

	Do you think I meant country matters?

	I think nothing, my lord.

	That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.

	What is, my lord?

	Nothing.

	You are merry, my lord.

	Who, I?

	Ay, my lord.

	O God, your only jig-maker. What should a man do
	but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my
	mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.

	Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.

	So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for
	I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens! die two
	months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's
	hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half
	a year: but, by'r lady, he must build churches,
	then; or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with
	the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is 'For, O, for, O,
	the hobby-horse is forgot.'

	What means this, my lord?

	Marry, this is miching mallecho; it means mischief.

	Belike this show imports the argument of the play.

	We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot
	keep counsel; they'll tell all.

	Will he tell us what this show meant?

	Ay, or any show that you'll show him: be not you
	ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.

	You are naught, you are naught: I'll mark the play.

	     For us, and for our tragedy,
	Here stooping to your clemency,
	We beg your hearing patiently.

	Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?

	'Tis brief, my lord.

	As woman's love.

	   Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round
	Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,
	And thirty dozen moons with borrow'd sheen
	About the world have times twelve thirties been,
	Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands
	Unite commutual in most sacred bands.

	   So many journeys may the sun and moon
	Make us again count o'er ere love be done!
	But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,
	So far from cheer and from your former state,
	That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,
	Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must:
	For women's fear and love holds quantity;
	In neither aught, or in extremity.
	Now, what my love is, proof hath made you know;
	And as my love is sized, my fear is so:
	Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear;
	Where little fears grow great, great love grows there.

	'Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too;
	My operant powers their functions leave to do:
	And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,
	Honour'd, beloved; and haply one as kind
	For husband shalt thou--

	O, confound the rest!
	Such love must needs be treason in my breast:
	In second husband let me be accurst!
	None wed the second but who kill'd the first.

	Wormwood, wormwood.

	   The instances that second marriage move
	Are base respects of thrift, but none of love:
	A second time I kill my husband dead,
	When second husband kisses me in bed.

	   I do believe you think what now you speak;
	But what we do determine oft we break.
	Purpose is but the slave to memory,
	Of violent birth, but poor validity;
	Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree;
	But fall, unshaken, when they mellow be.
	Most necessary 'tis that we forget
	To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt:
	What to ourselves in passion we propose,
	The passion ending, doth the purpose lose.
	The violence of either grief or joy
	Their own enactures with themselves destroy:
	Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament;
	Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident.
	This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
	That even our loves should with our fortunes change;
	For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,
	Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love.
	The great man down, you mark his favourite flies;
	The poor advanced makes friends of enemies.
	And hitherto doth love on fortune tend;
	For who not needs shall never lack a friend,
	And who in want a hollow friend doth try,
	Directly seasons him his enemy.
	But, orderly to end where I begun,
	Our wills and fates do so contrary run
	That our devices still are overthrown;
	Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own:
	So think thou wilt no second husband wed;
	But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.

	   Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light!
	Sport and repose lock from me day and night!
	To desperation turn my trust and hope!
	An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope!
	Each opposite that blanks the face of joy
	Meet what I would have well and it destroy!
	Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,
	If, once a widow, ever I be wife!

	If she should break it now!

	'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile;
	My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile
	The tedious day with sleep.

	Sleep rock thy brain,
	And never come mischance between us twain!

	Madam, how like you this play?

	The lady protests too much, methinks.

	O, but she'll keep her word.

	Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in 't?

	No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence
	i' the world.

	What do you call the play?

	The Mouse-trap. Marry, how? Tropically. This play
	is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago is
	the duke's name; his wife, Baptista: you shall see
	anon; 'tis a knavish piece of work: but what o'
	that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it
	touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our
	withers are unwrung.

	This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king.

	You are as good as a chorus, my lord.

	I could interpret between you and your love, if I
	could see the puppets dallying.

	You are keen, my lord, you are keen.

	It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge.

	Still better, and worse.

	So you must take your husbands. Begin, murderer;
	pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come:
	'the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.'

	Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing;
	Confederate season, else no creature seeing;
	Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,
	With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,
	Thy natural magic and dire property,
	On wholesome life usurp immediately.

	He poisons him i' the garden for's estate. His
	name's Gonzago: the story is extant, and writ in
	choice Italian: you shall see anon how the murderer
	gets the love of Gonzago's wife.

	The king rises.

	What, frighted with false fire!

	How fares my lord?

	Give o'er the play.

	Give me some light: away!

	Lights, lights, lights!

	     Why, let the stricken deer go weep,
	The hart ungalled play;
	For some must watch, while some must sleep:
	So runs the world away.
	Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers-- if
	the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me--with two
	Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a
	fellowship in a cry of players, sir?

	Half a share.

	A whole one, I.
	For thou dost know, O Damon dear,
	This realm dismantled was
	Of Jove himself; and now reigns here
	A very, very--pajock.

	You might have rhymed.

	O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a
	thousand pound. Didst perceive?

	Very well, my lord.

	Upon the talk of the poisoning?

	I did very well note him.

	Ah, ha! Come, some music! come, the recorders!
	For if the king like not the comedy,
	Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy.
	Come, some music!

	Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.

	Sir, a whole history.

	The king, sir,--

	Ay, sir, what of him?

	Is in his retirement marvellous distempered.

	With drink, sir?

	No, my lord, rather with choler.

	Your wisdom should show itself more richer to
	signify this to his doctor; for, for me to put him
	to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far
	more choler.

	Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and
	start not so wildly from my affair.

	I am tame, sir: pronounce.

	The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of
	spirit, hath sent me to you.

	You are welcome.

	Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right
	breed. If it shall please you to make me a
	wholesome answer, I will do your mother's
	commandment: if not, your pardon and my return
	shall be the end of my business.

	Sir, I cannot.

	What, my lord?

	Make you a wholesome answer; my wit's diseased: but,
	sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command;
	or, rather, as you say, my mother: therefore no
	more, but to the matter: my mother, you say,--

	Then thus she says; your behavior hath struck her
	into amazement and admiration.

	O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But
	is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's
	admiration? Impart.

	She desires to speak with you in her closet, ere you
	go to bed.

	We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have
	you any further trade with us?

	My lord, you once did love me.

	So I do still, by these pickers and stealers.

	Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you
	do, surely, bar the door upon your own liberty, if
	you deny your griefs to your friend.

	Sir, I lack advancement.

	How can that be, when you have the voice of the king
	himself for your succession in Denmark?

	Ay, but sir, 'While the grass grows,'--the proverb
	is something musty.

	O, the recorders! let me see one. To withdraw with
	you:--why do you go about to recover the wind of me,
	as if you would drive me into a toil?

	O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too
	unmannerly.

	I do not well understand that. Will you play upon
	this pipe?

	My lord, I cannot.

	I pray you.

	Believe me, I cannot.

	I do beseech you.

	I know no touch of it, my lord.

	'Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with
	your lingers and thumb, give it breath with your
	mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music.
	Look you, these are the stops.

	But these cannot I command to any utterance of
	harmony; I have not the skill.

	Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of
	me! You would play upon me; you would seem to know
	my stops; you would pluck out the heart of my
	mystery; you would sound me from my lowest note to
	the top of my compass: and there is much music,
	excellent voice, in this little organ; yet cannot
	you make it speak. 'Sblood, do you think I am
	easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what
	instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you
	cannot play upon me.

	God bless you, sir!

	My lord, the queen would speak with you, and
	presently.

	Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?

	By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed.

	Methinks it is like a weasel.

	It is backed like a weasel.

	Or like a whale?

	Very like a whale.

	Then I will come to my mother by and by. They fool
	me to the top of my bent. I will come by and by.

	I will say so.

	By and by is easily said.

	Leave me, friends.

	Tis now the very witching time of night,
	When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out
	Contagion to this world: now could I drink hot blood,
	And do such bitter business as the day
	Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother.
	O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
	The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom:
	Let me be cruel, not unnatural:
	I will speak daggers to her, but use none;
	My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites;
	How in my words soever she be shent,
	To give them seals never, my soul, consent!

	I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
	To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
	I your commission will forthwith dispatch,
	And he to England shall along with you:
	The terms of our estate may not endure
	Hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow
	Out of his lunacies.

	We will ourselves provide:
	Most holy and religious fear it is
	To keep those many many bodies safe
	That live and feed upon your majesty.

	The single and peculiar life is bound,
	With all the strength and armour of the mind,
	To keep itself from noyance; but much more
	That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest
	The lives of many. The cease of majesty
	Dies not alone; but, like a gulf, doth draw
	What's near it with it: it is a massy wheel,
	Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
	To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
	Are mortised and adjoin'd; which, when it falls,
	Each small annexment, petty consequence,
	Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone
	Did the king sigh, but with a general groan.

	Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage;
	For we will fetters put upon this fear,
	Which now goes too free-footed.

	We will haste us.

	My lord, he's going to his mother's closet:
	Behind the arras I'll convey myself,
	To hear the process; and warrant she'll tax him home:
	And, as you said, and wisely was it said,
	'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
	Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
	The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege:
	I'll call upon you ere you go to bed,
	And tell you what I know.

	Thanks, dear my lord.

	O, my offence is rank it smells to heaven;
	It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
	A brother's murder. Pray can I not,
	Though inclination be as sharp as will:
	My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent;
	And, like a man to double business bound,
	I stand in pause where I shall first begin,
	And both neglect. What if this cursed hand
	Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
	Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
	To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
	But to confront the visage of offence?
	And what's in prayer but this two-fold force,
	To be forestalled ere we come to fall,
	Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up;
	My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer
	Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murder'?
	That cannot be; since I am still possess'd
	Of those effects for which I did the murder,
	My crown, mine own ambition and my queen.
	May one be pardon'd and retain the offence?
	In the corrupted currents of this world
	Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
	And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
	Buys out the law: but 'tis not so above;
	There is no shuffling, there the action lies
	In his true nature; and we ourselves compell'd,
	Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
	To give in evidence. What then? what rests?
	Try what repentance can: what can it not?
	Yet what can it when one can not repent?
	O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
	O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
	Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay!
	Bow, stubborn knees; and, heart with strings of steel,
	Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!
	All may be well.

	Now might I do it pat, now he is praying;
	And now I'll do't. And so he goes to heaven;
	And so am I revenged. That would be scann'd:
	A villain kills my father; and for that,
	I, his sole son, do this same villain send
	To heaven.
	O, this is hire and salary, not revenge.
	He took my father grossly, full of bread;
	With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May;
	And how his audit stands who knows save heaven?
	But in our circumstance and course of thought,
	'Tis heavy with him: and am I then revenged,
	To take him in the purging of his soul,
	When he is fit and season'd for his passage?
	No!
	Up, sword; and know thou a more horrid hent:
	When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,
	Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed;
	At gaming, swearing, or about some act
	That has no relish of salvation in't;
	Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
	And that his soul may be as damn'd and black
	As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays:
	This physic but prolongs thy sickly days.

	My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:
	Words without thoughts never to heaven go.

	He will come straight. Look you lay home to him:
	Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
	And that your grace hath screen'd and stood between
	Much heat and him. I'll sconce me even here.
	Pray you, be round with him.

	Mother, mother, mother!

	I'll warrant you,
	Fear me not: withdraw, I hear him coming.

	Now, mother, what's the matter?

	Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.

	Mother, you have my father much offended.

	Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.

	Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.

	Why, how now, Hamlet!

	What's the matter now?

	Have you forgot me?

	No, by the rood, not so:
	You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife;
	And--would it were not so!--you are my mother.

	Nay, then, I'll set those to you that can speak.

	Come, come, and sit you down; you shall not budge;
	You go not till I set you up a glass
	Where you may see the inmost part of you.

	What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me?
	Help, help, ho!

	What, ho! help, help, help!

	How now! a rat? Dead, for a ducat, dead!

	O, I am slain!

	O me, what hast thou done?

	Nay, I know not:
	Is it the king?

	O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!

	A bloody deed! almost as bad, good mother,
	As kill a king, and marry with his brother.

	As kill a king!

	                  Ay, lady, 'twas my word.

	Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
	I took thee for thy better: take thy fortune;
	Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
	Leave wringing of your hands: peace! sit you down,
	And let me wring your heart; for so I shall,
	If it be made of penetrable stuff,
	If damned custom have not brass'd it so
	That it is proof and bulwark against sense.

	What have I done, that thou darest wag thy tongue
	In noise so rude against me?

	Such an act
	That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,
	Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose
	From the fair forehead of an innocent love
	And sets a blister there, makes marriage-vows
	As false as dicers' oaths: O, such a deed
	As from the body of contraction plucks
	The very soul, and sweet religion makes
	A rhapsody of words: heaven's face doth glow:
	Yea, this solidity and compound mass,
	With tristful visage, as against the doom,
	Is thought-sick at the act.

	Ay me, what act,
	That roars so loud, and thunders in the index?

	Look here, upon this picture, and on this,
	The counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
	See, what a grace was seated on this brow;
	Hyperion's curls; the front of Jove himself;
	An eye like Mars, to threaten and command;
	A station like the herald Mercury
	New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill;
	A combination and a form indeed,
	Where every god did seem to set his seal,
	To give the world assurance of a man:
	This was your husband. Look you now, what follows:
	Here is your husband; like a mildew'd ear,
	Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
	Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
	And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes?
	You cannot call it love; for at your age
	The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,
	And waits upon the judgment: and what judgment
	Would step from this to this? Sense, sure, you have,
	Else could you not have motion; but sure, that sense
	Is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
	Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thrall'd
	But it reserved some quantity of choice,
	To serve in such a difference. What devil was't
	That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
	Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
	Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
	Or but a sickly part of one true sense
	Could not so mope.
	O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
	If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
	To flaming youth let virtue be as wax,
	And melt in her own fire: proclaim no shame
	When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
	Since frost itself as actively doth burn
	And reason panders will.

	O Hamlet, speak no more:
	Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul;
	And there I see such black and grained spots
	As will not leave their tinct.

	Nay, but to live
	In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
	Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
	Over the nasty sty,--

	O, speak to me no more;
	These words, like daggers, enter in mine ears;
	No more, sweet Hamlet!

	A murderer and a villain;
	A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
	Of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
	A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
	That from a shelf the precious diadem stole,
	And put it in his pocket!

	No more!

	A king of shreds and patches,--

	Save me, and hover o'er me with your wings,
	You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?

	Alas, he's mad!

	Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
	That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by
	The important acting of your dread command? O, say!

	Do not forget: this visitation
	Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
	But, look, amazement on thy mother sits:
	O, step between her and her fighting soul:
	Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works:
	Speak to her, Hamlet.

	How is it with you, lady?

	Alas, how is't with you,
	That you do bend your eye on vacancy
	And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?
	Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
	And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm,
	Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,
	Starts up, and stands on end. O gentle son,
	Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
	Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?

	On him, on him! Look you, how pale he glares!
	His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
	Would make them capable. Do not look upon me;
	Lest with this piteous action you convert
	My stern effects: then what I have to do
	Will want true colour; tears perchance for blood.

	To whom do you speak this?

	Do you see nothing there?

	Nothing at all; yet all that is I see.

	Nor did you nothing hear?

	No, nothing but ourselves.

	Why, look you there! look, how it steals away!
	My father, in his habit as he lived!
	Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal!

	This the very coinage of your brain:
	This bodiless creation ecstasy
	Is very cunning in.

	Ecstasy!
	My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,
	And makes as healthful music: it is not madness
	That I have utter'd: bring me to the test,
	And I the matter will re-word; which madness
	Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
	Lay not that mattering unction to your soul,
	That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:
	It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
	Whilst rank corruption, mining all within,
	Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
	Repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
	And do not spread the compost on the weeds,
	To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;
	For in the fatness of these pursy times
	Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,
	Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.

	O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.

	O, throw away the worser part of it,
	And live the purer with the other half.
	Good night: but go not to mine uncle's bed;
	Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
	That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,
	Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,
	That to the use of actions fair and good
	He likewise gives a frock or livery,
	That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
	And that shall lend a kind of easiness
	To the next abstinence: the next more easy;
	For use almost can change the stamp of nature,
	And either [         ] the devil, or throw him out
	With wondrous potency. Once more, good night:
	And when you are desirous to be bless'd,
	I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord,

	I do repent: but heaven hath pleased it so,
	To punish me with this and this with me,
	That I must be their scourge and minister.
	I will bestow him, and will answer well
	The death I gave him. So, again, good night.
	I must be cruel, only to be kind:
	Thus bad begins and worse remains behind.
	One word more, good lady.

	What shall I do?

	Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:
	Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed;
	Pinch wanton on your cheek; call you his mouse;
	And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,
	Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,
	Make you to ravel all this matter out,
	That I essentially am not in madness,
	But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know;
	For who, that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,
	Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,
	Such dear concernings hide? who would do so?
	No, in despite of sense and secrecy,
	Unpeg the basket on the house's top.
	Let the birds fly, and, like the famous ape,
	To try conclusions, in the basket creep,
	And break your own neck down.

	Be thou assured, if words be made of breath,
	And breath of life, I have no life to breathe
	What thou hast said to me.

	I must to England; you know that?

	Alack,
	I had forgot: 'tis so concluded on.

	There's letters seal'd: and my two schoolfellows,
	Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,
	They bear the mandate; they must sweep my way,
	And marshal me to knavery. Let it work;
	For 'tis the sport to have the engineer
	Hoist with his own petard: and 't shall go hard
	But I will delve one yard below their mines,
	And blow them at the moon: O, 'tis most sweet,
	When in one line two crafts directly meet.
	This man shall set me packing:
	I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room.
	Mother, good night. Indeed this counsellor
	Is now most still, most secret and most grave,
	Who was in life a foolish prating knave.
	Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you.
	Good night, mother.

	There's matter in these sighs, these profound heaves:
	You must translate: 'tis fit we understand them.
	Where is your son?

	Bestow this place on us a little while.

	Ah, my good lord, what have I seen to-night!

	What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?

	Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend
	Which is the mightier: in his lawless fit,
	Behind the arras hearing something stir,
	Whips out his rapier, cries, 'A rat, a rat!'
	And, in this brainish apprehension, kills
	The unseen good old man.

	O heavy deed!
	It had been so with us, had we been there:
	His liberty is full of threats to all;
	To you yourself, to us, to every one.
	Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?
	It will be laid to us, whose providence
	Should have kept short, restrain'd and out of haunt,
	This mad young man: but so much was our love,
	We would not understand what was most fit;
	But, like the owner of a foul disease,
	To keep it from divulging, let it feed
	Even on the pith of Life. Where is he gone?

	To draw apart the body he hath kill'd:
	O'er whom his very madness, like some ore
	Among a mineral of metals base,
	Shows itself pure; he weeps for what is done.

	O Gertrude, come away!
	The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,
	But we will ship him hence: and this vile deed
	We must, with all our majesty and skill,
	Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!

	Friends both, go join you with some further aid:
	Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,
	And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him:
	Go seek him out; speak fair, and bring the body
	Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this.

	Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends;
	And let them know, both what we mean to do,
	And what's untimely done [                ]
	Whose whisper o'er the world's diameter,
	As level as the cannon to his blank,
	Transports his poison'd shot, may miss our name,
	And hit the woundless air. O, come away!
	My soul is full of discord and dismay.

	Safely stowed.


	Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!

	What noise? who calls on Hamlet?
	O, here they come.

	What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?

	Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.

	Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence
	And bear it to the chapel.

	Do not believe it.

	Believe what?

	That I can keep your counsel and not mine own.
	Besides, to be demanded of a sponge! what
	replication should be made by the son of a king?

	Take you me for a sponge, my lord?

	Ay, sir, that soaks up the king's countenance, his
	rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the
	king best service in the end: he keeps them, like
	an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouthed, to
	be last swallowed: when he needs what you have
	gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you
	shall be dry again.

	I understand you not, my lord.

	I am glad of it: a knavish speech sleeps in a
	foolish ear.

	My lord, you must tell us where the body is, and go
	with us to the king.

	The body is with the king, but the king is not with
	the body. The king is a thing--

	A thing, my lord!

	Of nothing: bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after.

	I have sent to seek him, and to find the body.
	How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!
	Yet must not we put the strong law on him:
	He's loved of the distracted multitude,
	Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes;
	And where tis so, the offender's scourge is weigh'd,
	But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,
	This sudden sending him away must seem
	Deliberate pause: diseases desperate grown
	By desperate appliance are relieved,
	Or not at all.

	How now! what hath befall'n?

	Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,
	We cannot get from him.

	But where is he?

	Without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.

	Bring him before us.

	Ho, Guildenstern! bring in my lord.

	Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?

	At supper.

	At supper! where?

	Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a certain
	convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your
	worm is your only emperor for diet: we fat all
	creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for
	maggots: your fat king and your lean beggar is but
	variable service, two dishes, but to one table:
	that's the end.

	Alas, alas!

	A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a
	king, and cat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.

	What dost you mean by this?

	Nothing but to show you how a king may go a
	progress through the guts of a beggar.

	Where is Polonius?

	In heaven; send hither to see: if your messenger
	find him not there, seek him i' the other place
	yourself. But indeed, if you find him not within
	this month, you shall nose him as you go up the
	stairs into the lobby.

	Go seek him there.

	He will stay till ye come.

	Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,--
	Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve
	For that which thou hast done,--must send thee hence
	With fiery quickness: therefore prepare thyself;
	The bark is ready, and the wind at help,
	The associates tend, and every thing is bent
	For England.

	                  For England!

	Ay, Hamlet.

	Good.

	So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.

	I see a cherub that sees them. But, come; for
	England! Farewell, dear mother.

	Thy loving father, Hamlet.

	My mother: father and mother is man and wife; man
	and wife is one flesh; and so, my mother. Come, for England!

	Follow him at foot; tempt him with speed aboard;
	Delay it not; I'll have him hence to-night:
	Away! for every thing is seal'd and done
	That else leans on the affair: pray you, make haste.

	And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught--
	As my great power thereof may give thee sense,
	Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red
	After the Danish sword, and thy free awe
	Pays homage to us--thou mayst not coldly set
	Our sovereign process; which imports at full,
	By letters congruing to that effect,
	The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England;
	For like the hectic in my blood he rages,
	And thou must cure me: till I know 'tis done,
	Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun.

	Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king;
	Tell him that, by his licence, Fortinbras
	Craves the conveyance of a promised march
	Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous.
	If that his majesty would aught with us,
	We shall express our duty in his eye;
	And let him know so.

	I will do't, my lord.

	Go softly on.

	Good sir, whose powers are these?

	They are of Norway, sir.

	How purposed, sir, I pray you?

	Against some part of Poland.

	Who commands them, sir?

	The nephews to old Norway, Fortinbras.

	Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,
	Or for some frontier?

	Truly to speak, and with no addition,
	We go to gain a little patch of ground
	That hath in it no profit but the name.
	To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it;
	Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole
	A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.

	Why, then the Polack never will defend it.

	Yes, it is already garrison'd.

	Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats
	Will not debate the question of this straw:
	This is the imposthume of much wealth and peace,
	That inward breaks, and shows no cause without
	Why the man dies. I humbly thank you, sir.

	God be wi' you, sir.

	Wilt please you go, my lord?

	I'll be with you straight go a little before.

	How all occasions do inform against me,
	And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,
	If his chief good and market of his time
	Be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more.
	Sure, he that made us with such large discourse,
	Looking before and after, gave us not
	That capability and god-like reason
	To fust in us unused. Now, whether it be
	Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
	Of thinking too precisely on the event,
	A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom
	And ever three parts coward, I do not know
	Why yet I live to say 'This thing's to do;'
	Sith I have cause and will and strength and means
	To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me:
	Witness this army of such mass and charge
	Led by a delicate and tender prince,
	Whose spirit with divine ambition puff'd
	Makes mouths at the invisible event,
	Exposing what is mortal and unsure
	To all that fortune, death and danger dare,
	Even for an egg-shell. Rightly to be great
	Is not to stir without great argument,
	But greatly to find quarrel in a straw
	When honour's at the stake. How stand I then,
	That have a father kill'd, a mother stain'd,
	Excitements of my reason and my blood,
	And let all sleep? while, to my shame, I see
	The imminent death of twenty thousand men,
	That, for a fantasy and trick of fame,
	Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot
	Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,
	Which is not tomb enough and continent
	To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,
	My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!

	I will not speak with her.

	She is importunate, indeed distract:
	Her mood will needs be pitied.

	What would she have?

	She speaks much of her father; says she hears
	There's tricks i' the world; and hems, and beats her heart;
	Spurns enviously at straws; speaks things in doubt,
	That carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,
	Yet the unshaped use of it doth move
	The hearers to collection; they aim at it,
	And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts;
	Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures
	yield them,
	Indeed would make one think there might be thought,
	Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.

	'Twere good she were spoken with; for she may strew
	Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds.

	Let her come in.

	To my sick soul, as sin's true nature is,
	Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss:
	So full of artless jealousy is guilt,
	It spills itself in fearing to be spilt.

	Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?

	How now, Ophelia!

	How should I your true love know
	From another one?
	By his cockle hat and staff,
	And his sandal shoon.

	Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?

	Say you? nay, pray you, mark.

	He is dead and gone, lady,
	He is dead and gone;
	At his head a grass-green turf,
	At his heels a stone.

	Nay, but, Ophelia,--

	Pray you, mark.

	White his shroud as the mountain snow,--

	Alas, look here, my lord.

	Larded with sweet flowers
	Which bewept to the grave did go
	With true-love showers.

	How do you, pretty lady?

	Well, God 'ild you! They say the owl was a baker's
	daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know not
	what we may be. God be at your table!

	Conceit upon her father.

	Pray you, let's have no words of this; but when they
	ask you what it means, say you this:

	To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,
	All in the morning betime,
	And I a maid at your window,
	To be your Valentine.
	Then up he rose, and donn'd his clothes,
	And dupp'd the chamber-door;
	Let in the maid, that out a maid
	Never departed more.

	Pretty Ophelia!

	Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't:

	By Gis and by Saint Charity,
	Alack, and fie for shame!
	Young men will do't, if they come to't;
	By cock, they are to blame.
	Quoth she, before you tumbled me,
	You promised me to wed.
	So would I ha' done, by yonder sun,
	An thou hadst not come to my bed.

	How long hath she been thus?

	I hope all will be well. We must be patient: but I
	cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him
	i' the cold ground. My brother shall know of it:
	and so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my
	coach! Good night, ladies; good night, sweet ladies;
	good night, good night.

	Follow her close; give her good watch,
	I pray you.

	O, this is the poison of deep grief; it springs
	All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,
	When sorrows come, they come not single spies
	But in battalions. First, her father slain:
	Next, your son gone; and he most violent author
	Of his own just remove: the people muddied,
	Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers,
	For good Polonius' death; and we have done but greenly,
	In hugger-mugger to inter him: poor Ophelia
	Divided from herself and her fair judgment,
	Without the which we are pictures, or mere beasts:
	Last, and as much containing as all these,
	Her brother is in secret come from France;
	Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,
	And wants not buzzers to infect his ear
	With pestilent speeches of his father's death;
	Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,
	Will nothing stick our person to arraign
	In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,
	Like to a murdering-piece, in many places
	Gives me superfluous death.

	Alack, what noise is this?

	Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door.

	What is the matter?

	Save yourself, my lord:
	The ocean, overpeering of his list,
	Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste
	Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,
	O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him lord;
	And, as the world were now but to begin,
	Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
	The ratifiers and props of every word,
	They cry 'Choose we: Laertes shall be king:'
	Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds:
	'Laertes shall be king, Laertes king!'

	How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!
	O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!

	The doors are broke.

	Where is this king? Sirs, stand you all without.

	No, let's come in.

	                  I pray you, give me leave.

	We will, we will.

	I thank you: keep the door. O thou vile king,
	Give me my father!

	                  Calmly, good Laertes.

	That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard,
	Cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot
	Even here, between the chaste unsmirched brow
	Of my true mother.

	                  What is the cause, Laertes,
	That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?
	Let him go, Gertrude; do not fear our person:
	There's such divinity doth hedge a king,
	That treason can but peep to what it would,
	Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,
	Why thou art thus incensed. Let him go, Gertrude.
	Speak, man.

	Where is my father?

	Dead.

	But not by him.

	Let him demand his fill.

	How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:
	To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil!
	Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!
	I dare damnation. To this point I stand,
	That both the worlds I give to negligence,
	Let come what comes; only I'll be revenged
	Most thoroughly for my father.

	Who shall stay you?

	My will, not all the world:
	And for my means, I'll husband them so well,
	They shall go far with little.

	Good Laertes,
	If you desire to know the certainty
	Of your dear father's death, is't writ in your revenge,
	That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe,
	Winner and loser?

	None but his enemies.

	Will you know them then?

	To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms;
	And like the kind life-rendering pelican,
	Repast them with my blood.

	Why, now you speak
	Like a good child and a true gentleman.
	That I am guiltless of your father's death,
	And am most sensible in grief for it,
	It shall as level to your judgment pierce
	As day does to your eye.

	Let her come in.

	How now! what noise is that?

	O heat, dry up my brains! tears seven times salt,
	Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!
	By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight,
	Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!
	Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!
	O heavens! is't possible, a young maid's wits
	Should be as moral as an old man's life?
	Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,
	It sends some precious instance of itself
	After the thing it loves.

	They bore him barefaced on the bier;
	Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny;
	And in his grave rain'd many a tear:--
	Fare you well, my dove!

	Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,
	It could not move thus.

	You must sing a-down a-down,
	An you call him a-down-a.
	O, how the wheel becomes it! It is the false
	steward, that stole his master's daughter.

	This nothing's more than matter.

	There's rosemary, that's for remembrance; pray,
	love, remember: and there is pansies. that's for thoughts.

	A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted.

	There's fennel for you, and columbines: there's rue
	for you; and here's some for me: we may call it
	herb-grace o' Sundays: O you must wear your rue with
	a difference. There's a daisy: I would give you
	some violets, but they withered all when my father
	died: they say he made a good end,--

	For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy.

	Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,
	She turns to favour and to prettiness.

	And will he not come again?
	And will he not come again?
	No, no, he is dead:
	Go to thy death-bed:
	He never will come again.

	His beard was as white as snow,
	All flaxen was his poll:
	He is gone, he is gone,
	And we cast away moan:
	God ha' mercy on his soul!

	And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God be wi' ye.

	Do you see this, O God?

	Laertes, I must commune with your grief,
	Or you deny me right. Go but apart,
	Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will.
	And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me:
	If by direct or by collateral hand
	They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,
	Our crown, our life, and all that we can ours,
	To you in satisfaction; but if not,
	Be you content to lend your patience to us,
	And we shall jointly labour with your soul
	To give it due content.

	Let this be so;
	His means of death, his obscure funeral--
	No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,
	No noble rite nor formal ostentation--
	Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,
	That I must call't in question.

	So you shall;
	And where the offence is let the great axe fall.
	I pray you, go with me.

	What are they that would speak with me?

	Sailors, sir: they say they have letters for you.

	Let them come in.

	I do not know from what part of the world
	I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet.

	God bless you, sir.

	Let him bless thee too.

	He shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for
	you, sir; it comes from the ambassador that was
	bound for England; if your name be Horatio, as I am
	let to know it is.

	'Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked
	this, give these fellows some means to the king:
	they have letters for him. Ere we were two days old
	at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us
	chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on
	a compelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded
	them: on the instant they got clear of our ship; so
	I alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with
	me like thieves of mercy: but they knew what they
	did; I am to do a good turn for them. Let the king
	have the letters I have sent; and repair thou to me
	with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I
	have words to speak in thine ear will make thee
	dumb; yet are they much too light for the bore of
	the matter. These good fellows will bring thee
	where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their
	course for England: of them I have much to tell
	thee. Farewell.
	'He that thou knowest thine, Hamlet.'
	Come, I will make you way for these your letters;
	And do't the speedier, that you may direct me
	To him from whom you brought them.

	Now must your conscience my acquaintance seal,
	And you must put me in your heart for friend,
	Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,
	That he which hath your noble father slain
	Pursued my life.

	                  It well appears: but tell me
	Why you proceeded not against these feats,
	So crimeful and so capital in nature,
	As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,
	You mainly were stirr'd up.

	O, for two special reasons;
	Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew'd,
	But yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother
	Lives almost by his looks; and for myself--
	My virtue or my plague, be it either which--
	She's so conjunctive to my life and soul,
	That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,
	I could not but by her. The other motive,
	Why to a public count I might not go,
	Is the great love the general gender bear him;
	Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,
	Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,
	Convert his gyves to graces; so that my arrows,
	Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,
	Would have reverted to my bow again,
	And not where I had aim'd them.

	And so have I a noble father lost;
	A sister driven into desperate terms,
	Whose worth, if praises may go back again,
	Stood challenger on mount of all the age
	For her perfections: but my revenge will come.

	Break not your sleeps for that: you must not think
	That we are made of stuff so flat and dull
	That we can let our beard be shook with danger
	And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more:
	I loved your father, and we love ourself;
	And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--

	How now! what news?

	Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:
	This to your majesty; this to the queen.

	From Hamlet! who brought them?

	Sailors, my lord, they say; I saw them not:
	They were given me by Claudio; he received them
	Of him that brought them.

	Laertes, you shall hear them. Leave us.

	'High and mighty, You shall know I am set naked on
	your kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to see
	your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your
	pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden
	and more strange return.                  'Hamlet.'
	What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?
	Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?

	Know you the hand?

	'Tis Hamlets character. 'Naked!
	And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.'
	Can you advise me?

	I'm lost in it, my lord. But let him come;
	It warms the very sickness in my heart,
	That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,
	'Thus didest thou.'

	If it be so, Laertes--
	As how should it be so? how otherwise?--
	Will you be ruled by me?

	Ay, my lord;
	So you will not o'errule me to a peace.

	To thine own peace. If he be now return'd,
	As checking at his voyage, and that he means
	No more to undertake it, I will work him
	To an exploit, now ripe in my device,
	Under the which he shall not choose but fall:
	And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,
	But even his mother shall uncharge the practise
	And call it accident.

	My lord, I will be ruled;
	The rather, if you could devise it so
	That I might be the organ.

	It falls right.
	You have been talk'd of since your travel much,
	And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality
	Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts
	Did not together pluck such envy from him
	As did that one, and that, in my regard,
	Of the unworthiest siege.

	What part is that, my lord?

	A very riband in the cap of youth,
	Yet needful too; for youth no less becomes
	The light and careless livery that it wears
	Than settled age his sables and his weeds,
	Importing health and graveness. Two months since,
	Here was a gentleman of Normandy:--
	I've seen myself, and served against, the French,
	And they can well on horseback: but this gallant
	Had witchcraft in't; he grew unto his seat;
	And to such wondrous doing brought his horse,
	As he had been incorpsed and demi-natured
	With the brave beast: so far he topp'd my thought,
	That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,
	Come short of what he did.

	A Norman was't?

	A Norman.

	Upon my life, Lamond.

	The very same.

	I know him well: he is the brooch indeed
	And gem of all the nation.

	He made confession of you,
	And gave you such a masterly report
	For art and exercise in your defence
	And for your rapier most especially,
	That he cried out, 'twould be a sight indeed,
	If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation,
	He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye,
	If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his
	Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy
	That he could nothing do but wish and beg
	Your sudden coming o'er, to play with him.
	Now, out of this,--

	What out of this, my lord?

	Laertes, was your father dear to you?
	Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,
	A face without a heart?

	Why ask you this?

	Not that I think you did not love your father;
	But that I know love is begun by time;
	And that I see, in passages of proof,
	Time qualifies the spark and fire of it.
	There lives within the very flame of love
	A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it;
	And nothing is at a like goodness still;
	For goodness, growing to a plurisy,
	Dies in his own too much: that we would do
	We should do when we would; for this 'would' changes
	And hath abatements and delays as many
	As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents;
	And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,
	That hurts by easing. But, to the quick o' the ulcer:--
	Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake,
	To show yourself your father's son in deed
	More than in words?

	To cut his throat i' the church.

	No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize;
	Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,
	Will you do this, keep close within your chamber.
	Hamlet return'd shall know you are come home:
	We'll put on those shall praise your excellence
	And set a double varnish on the fame
	The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together
	And wager on your heads: he, being remiss,
	Most generous and free from all contriving,
	Will not peruse the foils; so that, with ease,
	Or with a little shuffling, you may choose
	A sword unbated, and in a pass of practise
	Requite him for your father.

	I will do't:
	And, for that purpose, I'll anoint my sword.
	I bought an unction of a mountebank,
	So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,
	Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,
	Collected from all simples that have virtue
	Under the moon, can save the thing from death
	That is but scratch'd withal: I'll touch my point
	With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,
	It may be death.

	                  Let's further think of this;
	Weigh what convenience both of time and means
	May fit us to our shape: if this should fail,
	And that our drift look through our bad performance,
	'Twere better not assay'd: therefore this project
	Should have a back or second, that might hold,
	If this should blast in proof. Soft! let me see:
	We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha't.
	When in your motion you are hot and dry--
	As make your bouts more violent to that end--
	And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared him
	A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,
	If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,
	Our purpose may hold there.

		      How now, sweet queen!

	One woe doth tread upon another's heel,
	So fast they follow; your sister's drown'd, Laertes.

	Drown'd! O, where?

	There is a willow grows aslant a brook,
	That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream;
	There with fantastic garlands did she come
	Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples
	That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,
	But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them:
	There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds
	Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke;
	When down her weedy trophies and herself
	Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide;
	And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up:
	Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes;
	As one incapable of her own distress,
	Or like a creature native and indued
	Unto that element: but long it could not be
	Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,
	Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay
	To muddy death.

	                  Alas, then, she is drown'd?

	Drown'd, drown'd.

	Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,
	And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet
	It is our trick; nature her custom holds,
	Let shame say what it will: when these are gone,
	The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord:
	I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze,
	But that this folly douts it.

	Let's follow, Gertrude:
	How much I had to do to calm his rage!
	Now fear I this will give it start again;
	Therefore let's follow.

	Is she to be buried in Christian burial that
	wilfully seeks her own salvation?

	I tell thee she is: and therefore make her grave
	straight: the crowner hath sat on her, and finds it
	Christian burial.

	How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her
	own defence?

	Why, 'tis found so.

	It must be 'se offendendo;' it cannot be else. For
	here lies the point:  if I drown myself wittingly,
	it argues an act: and an act hath three branches: it
	is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned
	herself wittingly.

	Nay, but hear you, goodman delver,--

	Give me leave. Here lies the water; good: here
	stands the man; good; if the man go to this water,
	and drown himself, it is, will he, nill he, he
	goes,--mark you that; but if the water come to him
	and drown him, he drowns not himself: argal, he
	that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.

	But is this law?

	Ay, marry, is't; crowner's quest law.

	Will you ha' the truth on't? If this had not been
	a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'
	Christian burial.

	Why, there thou say'st: and the more pity that
	great folk should have countenance in this world to
	drown or hang themselves, more than their even
	Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient
	gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers:
	they hold up Adam's profession.

	Was he a gentleman?

	He was the first that ever bore arms.

	Why, he had none.

	What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the
	Scripture? The Scripture says 'Adam digged:'
	could he dig without arms? I'll put another
	question to thee: if thou answerest me not to the
	purpose, confess thyself--

	Go to.

	What is he that builds stronger than either the
	mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

	The gallows-maker; for that frame outlives a
	thousand tenants.

	I like thy wit well, in good faith: the gallows
	does well; but how does it well? it does well to
	those that do in: now thou dost ill to say the
	gallows is built stronger than the church: argal,
	the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come.

	'Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or
	a carpenter?'

	Ay, tell me that, and unyoke.

	Marry, now I can tell.

	To't.

	Mass, I cannot tell.

	Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull
	ass will not mend his pace with beating; and, when
	you are asked this question next, say 'a
	grave-maker: 'the houses that he makes last till
	doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan: fetch me a
	stoup of liquor.

	In youth, when I did love, did love,
	Methought it was very sweet,
	To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove,
	O, methought, there was nothing meet.

	Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he
	sings at grave-making?

	Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.

	'Tis e'en so: the hand of little employment hath
	the daintier sense.

	But age, with his stealing steps,
	Hath claw'd me in his clutch,
	And hath shipped me intil the land,
	As if I had never been such.

	That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once:
	how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were
	Cain's jaw-bone, that did the first murder! It
	might be the pate of a politician, which this ass
	now o'er-reaches; one that would circumvent God,
	might it not?

	It might, my lord.

	Or of a courtier; which could say 'Good morrow,
	sweet lord! How dost thou, good lord?' This might
	be my lord such-a-one, that praised my lord
	such-a-one's horse, when he meant to beg it; might it not?

	Ay, my lord.

	Why, e'en so: and now my Lady Worm's; chapless, and
	knocked about the mazzard with a sexton's spade:
	here's fine revolution, an we had the trick to
	see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding,
	but to play at loggats with 'em? mine ache to think on't.

	A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade,
	For and a shrouding sheet:
	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.

	There's another: why may not that be the skull of a
	lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his quillets,
	his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he
	suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the
	sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of
	his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be
	in's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,
	his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,
	his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines, and
	the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine
	pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him
	no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than
	the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The
	very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in
	this box; and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?

	Not a jot more, my lord.

	Is not parchment made of sheepskins?

	Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too.

	They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance
	in that. I will speak to this fellow. Whose
	grave's this, sirrah?

	Mine, sir.

	O, a pit of clay for to be made
	For such a guest is meet.

	I think it be thine, indeed; for thou liest in't.

	You lie out on't, sir, and therefore it is not
	yours: for my part, I do not lie in't, and yet it is mine.

	'Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine:
	'tis for the dead, not for the quick; therefore thou liest.

	'Tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away gain, from me to
	you.

	What man dost thou dig it for?

	For no man, sir.

	What woman, then?

	For none, neither.

	Who is to be buried in't?

	One that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.

	How absolute the knave is! we must speak by the
	card, or equivocation will undo us. By the Lord,
	Horatio, these three years I have taken a note of
	it; the age is grown so picked that the toe of the
	peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he
	gaffs his kibe. How long hast thou been a
	grave-maker?

	Of all the days i' the year, I came to't that day
	that our last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras.

	How long is that since?

	Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that: it
	was the very day that young Hamlet was born; he that
	is mad, and sent into England.

	Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?

	Why, because he was mad: he shall recover his wits
	there; or, if he do not, it's no great matter there.

	Why?

	'Twill, a not be seen in him there; there the men
	are as mad as he.

	How came he mad?

	Very strangely, they say.

	How strangely?

	Faith, e'en with losing his wits.

	Upon what ground?

	Why, here in Denmark: I have been sexton here, man
	and boy, thirty years.

	How long will a man lie i' the earth ere he rot?

	I' faith, if he be not rotten before he die--as we
	have many pocky corses now-a-days, that will scarce
	hold the laying in--he will last you some eight year
	or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year.

	Why he more than another?

	Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that
	he will keep out water a great while; and your water
	is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body.
	Here's a skull now; this skull has lain in the earth
	three and twenty years.

	Whose was it?

	A whoreson mad fellow's it was: whose do you think it was?

	Nay, I know not.

	A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a' poured a
	flagon of Rhenish on my head once. This same skull,
	sir, was Yorick's skull, the king's jester.

	This?

	E'en that.

	Let me see.

	Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him, Horatio: a fellow
	of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy: he hath
	borne me on his back a thousand times; and now, how
	abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rims at
	it. Here hung those lips that I have kissed I know
	not how oft. Where be your gibes now? your
	gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment,
	that were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one
	now, to mock your own grinning? quite chap-fallen?
	Now get you to my lady's chamber, and tell her, let
	her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must
	come; make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio, tell
	me one thing.

	What's that, my lord?

	Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this fashion i'
	the earth?

	E'en so.

	And smelt so? pah!

	E'en so, my lord.

	To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may
	not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander,
	till he find it stopping a bung-hole?

	'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.

	No, faith, not a jot; but to follow him thither with
	modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it: as
	thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried,
	Alexander returneth into dust; the dust is earth; of
	earth we make loam; and why of that loam, whereto he
	was converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel?
	Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,
	Might stop a hole to keep the wind away:
	O, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,
	Should patch a wall to expel the winter flaw!
	But soft! but soft! aside: here comes the king.

	The queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow?
	And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken
	The corse they follow did with desperate hand
	Fordo its own life: 'twas of some estate.
	Couch we awhile, and mark.

	What ceremony else?

	That is Laertes,
	A very noble youth: mark.

	What ceremony else?

	Her obsequies have been as far enlarged
	As we have warrantise: her death was doubtful;
	And, but that great command o'ersways the order,
	She should in ground unsanctified have lodged
	Till the last trumpet: for charitable prayers,
	Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her;
	Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,
	Her maiden strewments and the bringing home
	Of bell and burial.

	Must there no more be done?

	No more be done:
	We should profane the service of the dead
	To sing a requiem and such rest to her
	As to peace-parted souls.

	Lay her i' the earth:
	And from her fair and unpolluted flesh
	May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,
	A ministering angel shall my sister be,
	When thou liest howling.

	What, the fair Ophelia!

	Sweets to the sweet: farewell!

	I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife;
	I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,
	And not have strew'd thy grave.

	O, treble woe
	Fall ten times treble on that cursed head,
	Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense
	Deprived thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,
	Till I have caught her once more in mine arms:

	Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,
	Till of this flat a mountain you have made,
	To o'ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head
	Of blue Olympus.

	What is he whose grief
	Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow
	Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand
	Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,
	Hamlet the Dane.

	                  The devil take thy soul!

	Thou pray'st not well.
	I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat;
	For, though I am not splenitive and rash,
	Yet have I something in me dangerous,
	Which let thy wiseness fear: hold off thy hand.

	Pluck them asunder.

	Hamlet, Hamlet!

	Gentlemen,--

	                  Good my lord, be quiet.

	Why I will fight with him upon this theme
	Until my eyelids will no longer wag.

	O my son, what theme?

	I loved Ophelia: forty thousand brothers
	Could not, with all their quantity of love,
	Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?

	O, he is mad, Laertes.

	For love of God, forbear him.

	'Swounds, show me what thou'lt do:
	Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?
	Woo't drink up eisel? eat a crocodile?
	I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?
	To outface me with leaping in her grave?
	Be buried quick with her, and so will I:
	And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw
	Millions of acres on us, till our ground,
	Singeing his pate against the burning zone,
	Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,
	I'll rant as well as thou.

	This is mere madness:
	And thus awhile the fit will work on him;
	Anon, as patient as the female dove,
	When that her golden couplets are disclosed,
	His silence will sit drooping.

	Hear you, sir;
	What is the reason that you use me thus?
	I loved you ever: but it is no matter;
	Let Hercules himself do what he may,
	The cat will mew and dog will have his day.

	I pray you, good Horatio, wait upon him.

	Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech;
	We'll put the matter to the present push.
	Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son.
	This grave shall have a living monument:
	An hour of quiet shortly shall we see;
	Till then, in patience our proceeding be.

	So much for this, sir: now shall you see the other;
	You do remember all the circumstance?

	Remember it, my lord?

	Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting,
	That would not let me sleep: methought I lay
	Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly,
	And praised be rashness for it, let us know,
	Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well,
	When our deep plots do pall: and that should teach us
	There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
	Rough-hew them how we will,--

	That is most certain.

	Up from my cabin,
	My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark
	Groped I to find out them; had my desire.
	Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew
	To mine own room again; making so bold,
	My fears forgetting manners, to unseal
	Their grand commission; where I found, Horatio,--
	O royal knavery!--an exact command,
	Larded with many several sorts of reasons
	Importing Denmark's health and England's too,
	With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life,
	That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,
	No, not to stay the grinding of the axe,
	My head should be struck off.

	Is't possible?

	Here's the commission: read it at more leisure.
	But wilt thou hear me how I did proceed?

	I beseech you.

	Being thus be-netted round with villanies,--
	Ere I could make a prologue to my brains,
	They had begun the play--I sat me down,
	Devised a new commission, wrote it fair:
	I once did hold it, as our statists do,
	A baseness to write fair and labour'd much
	How to forget that learning, but, sir, now
	It did me yeoman's service: wilt thou know
	The effect of what I wrote?

	Ay, good my lord.

	An earnest conjuration from the king,
	As England was his faithful tributary,
	As love between them like the palm might flourish,
	As peace should stiff her wheaten garland wear
	And stand a comma 'tween their amities,
	And many such-like 'As'es of great charge,
	That, on the view and knowing of these contents,
	Without debatement further, more or less,
	He should the bearers put to sudden death,
	Not shriving-time allow'd.

	How was this seal'd?

	Why, even in that was heaven ordinant.
	I had my father's signet in my purse,
	Which was the model of that Danish seal;
	Folded the writ up in form of the other,
	Subscribed it, gave't the impression, placed it safely,
	The changeling never known. Now, the next day
	Was our sea-fight; and what to this was sequent
	Thou know'st already.

	So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't.

	Why, man, they did make love to this employment;
	They are not near my conscience; their defeat
	Does by their own insinuation grow:
	'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes
	Between the pass and fell incensed points
	Of mighty opposites.

	Why, what a king is this!

	Does it not, think'st thee, stand me now upon--
	He that hath kill'd my king and whored my mother,
	Popp'd in between the election and my hopes,
	Thrown out his angle for my proper life,
	And with such cozenage--is't not perfect conscience,
	To quit him with this arm? and is't not to be damn'd,
	To let this canker of our nature come
	In further evil?

	It must be shortly known to him from England
	What is the issue of the business there.

	It will be short: the interim is mine;
	And a man's life's no more than to say 'One.'
	But I am very sorry, good Horatio,
	That to Laertes I forgot myself;
	For, by the image of my cause, I see
	The portraiture of his: I'll court his favours.
	But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me
	Into a towering passion.

	Peace! who comes here?

	Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark.

	I humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this water-fly?

	No, my good lord.

	Thy state is the more gracious; for 'tis a vice to
	know him. He hath much land, and fertile: let a
	beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at
	the king's mess: 'tis a chough; but, as I say,
	spacious in the possession of dirt.

	Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I
	should impart a thing to you from his majesty.

	I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of
	spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use; 'tis for the head.

	I thank your lordship, it is very hot.

	No, believe me, 'tis very cold; the wind is
	northerly.

	It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.

	But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my
	complexion.

	Exceedingly, my lord; it is very sultry,--as
	'twere,--I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his
	majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a
	great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter,--

	I beseech you, remember--

	Nay, good my lord; for mine ease, in good faith.
	Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes; believe
	me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent
	differences, of very soft society and great showing:
	indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or
	calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the
	continent of what part a gentleman would see.

	Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you;
	though, I know, to divide him inventorially would
	dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw
	neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the
	verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of
	great article; and his infusion of such dearth and
	rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his
	semblable is his mirror; and who else would trace
	him, his umbrage, nothing more.

	Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.

	The concernancy, sir? why do we wrap the gentleman
	in our more rawer breath?

	Sir?

	Is't not possible to understand in another tongue?
	You will do't, sir, really.

	What imports the nomination of this gentleman?

	Of Laertes?

	His purse is empty already; all's golden words are spent.

	Of him, sir.

	I know you are not ignorant--

	I would you did, sir; yet, in faith, if you did,
	it would not much approve me. Well, sir?

	You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is--

	I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with
	him in excellence; but, to know a man well, were to
	know himself.

	I mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation
	laid on him by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.

	What's his weapon?

	Rapier and dagger.

	That's two of his weapons: but, well.

	The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary
	horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take
	it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their
	assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the
	carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very
	responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages,
	and of very liberal conceit.

	What call you the carriages?

	I knew you must be edified by the margent ere you had done.

	The carriages, sir, are the hangers.

	The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we
	could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might
	be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses
	against six French swords, their assigns, and three
	liberal-conceited carriages; that's the French bet
	against the Danish. Why is this 'imponed,' as you call it?

	The king, sir, hath laid, that in a dozen passes
	between yourself and him, he shall not exceed you
	three hits: he hath laid on twelve for nine; and it
	would come to immediate trial, if your lordship
	would vouchsafe the answer.

	How if I answer 'no'?

	I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.

	Sir, I will walk here in the hall: if it please his
	majesty, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let
	the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the
	king hold his purpose, I will win for him an I can;
	if not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.

	Shall I re-deliver you e'en so?

	To this effect, sir; after what flourish your nature will.

	I commend my duty to your lordship.

	Yours, yours.

	He does well to commend it himself; there are no
	tongues else for's turn.

	This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.

	He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it.
	Thus has he--and many more of the same bevy that I
	know the dressy age dotes on--only got the tune of
	the time and outward habit of encounter; a kind of
	yesty collection, which carries them through and
	through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do
	but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.

	My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young
	Osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in
	the hall: he sends to know if your pleasure hold to
	play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time.

	I am constant to my purpose; they follow the king's
	pleasure: if his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now
	or whensoever, provided I be so able as now.

	The king and queen and all are coming down.

	In happy time.

	The queen desires you to use some gentle
	entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play.

	She well instructs me.

	You will lose this wager, my lord.

	I do not think so: since he went into France, I
	have been in continual practise: I shall win at the
	odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill all's here
	about my heart: but it is no matter.

	Nay, good my lord,--

	It is but foolery; but it is such a kind of
	gain-giving, as would perhaps trouble a woman.

	If your mind dislike any thing, obey it: I will
	forestall their repair hither, and say you are not
	fit.

	Not a whit, we defy augury: there's a special
	providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now,
	'tis not to come; if it be not to come, it will be
	now; if it be not now, yet it will come: the
	readiness is all: since no man has aught of what he
	leaves, what is't to leave betimes?

	Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me.

	Give me your pardon, sir: I've done you wrong;
	But pardon't, as you are a gentleman.
	This presence knows,
	And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd
	With sore distraction. What I have done,
	That might your nature, honour and exception
	Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness.
	Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet:
	If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,
	And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,
	Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it.
	Who does it, then? His madness: if't be so,
	Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd;
	His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy.
	Sir, in this audience,
	Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil
	Free me so far in your most generous thoughts,
	That I have shot mine arrow o'er the house,
	And hurt my brother.

	I am satisfied in nature,
	Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most
	To my revenge: but in my terms of honour
	I stand aloof; and will no reconcilement,
	Till by some elder masters, of known honour,
	I have a voice and precedent of peace,
	To keep my name ungored. But till that time,
	I do receive your offer'd love like love,
	And will not wrong it.

	I embrace it freely;
	And will this brother's wager frankly play.
	Give us the foils. Come on.

	Come, one for me.

	I'll be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance
	Your skill shall, like a star i' the darkest night,
	Stick fiery off indeed.

	You mock me, sir.

	No, by this hand.

	Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,
	You know the wager?

	Very well, my lord
	Your grace hath laid the odds o' the weaker side.

	I do not fear it; I have seen you both:
	But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds.

	This is too heavy, let me see another.

	This likes me well. These foils have all a length?

	Ay, my good lord.

	Set me the stoops of wine upon that table.
	If Hamlet give the first or second hit,
	Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
	Let all the battlements their ordnance fire:
	The king shall drink to Hamlet's better breath;
	And in the cup an union shall he throw,
	Richer than that which four successive kings
	In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups;
	And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,
	The trumpet to the cannoneer without,
	The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth,
	'Now the king dunks to Hamlet.' Come, begin:
	And you, the judges, bear a wary eye.

	Come on, sir.

	                  Come, my lord.

	One.

	No.

	Judgment.

	A hit, a very palpable hit.

	Well; again.

	Stay; give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine;
	Here's to thy health.

		Give him the cup.

	I'll play this bout first; set it by awhile. Come.

	Another hit; what say you?

	A touch, a touch, I do confess.

	Our son shall win.

	                  He's fat, and scant of breath.
	Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows;
	The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet.

	Good madam!

	          Gertrude, do not drink.

	I will, my lord; I pray you, pardon me.

	It is the poison'd cup: it is too late.

	I dare not drink yet, madam; by and by.

	Come, let me wipe thy face.

	My lord, I'll hit him now.

	I do not think't.

	And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience.

	Come, for the third, Laertes: you but dally;
	I pray you, pass with your best violence;
	I am afeard you make a wanton of me.

	Say you so? come on.

	Nothing, neither way.

	Have at you now!

	Part them; they are incensed.

	Nay, come, again.

	                  Look to the queen there, ho!

	They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?

	How is't, Laertes?

	Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric;
	I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery.

	How does the queen?

	She swounds to see them bleed.

	No, no, the drink, the drink,--O my dear Hamlet,--
	The drink, the drink! I am poison'd.

	O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd:
	Treachery! Seek it out.

	It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain;
	No medicine in the world can do thee good;
	In thee there is not half an hour of life;
	The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,
	Unbated and envenom'd: the foul practise
	Hath turn'd itself on me lo, here I lie,
	Never to rise again: thy mother's poison'd:
	I can no more: the king, the king's to blame.

	The point!--envenom'd too!
	Then, venom, to thy work.

	Treason! treason!

	O, yet defend me, friends; I am but hurt.

	Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane,
	Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?
	Follow my mother.

	                  He is justly served;
	It is a poison temper'd by himself.
	Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet:
	Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,
	Nor thine on me.

	Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee.
	I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!
	You that look pale and tremble at this chance,
	That are but mutes or audience to this act,
	Had I but time--as this fell sergeant, death,
	Is strict in his arrest--O, I could tell you--
	But let it be. Horatio, I am dead;
	Thou livest; report me and my cause aright
	To the unsatisfied.

	Never believe it:
	I am more an antique Roman than a Dane:
	Here's yet some liquor left.

	As thou'rt a man,
	Give me the cup: let go; by heaven, I'll have't.
	O good Horatio, what a wounded name,
	Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me!
	If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart
	Absent thee from felicity awhile,
	And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,
	To tell my story.

	What warlike noise is this?

	Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,
	To the ambassadors of England gives
	This warlike volley.

	O, I die, Horatio;
	The potent poison quite o'er-crows my spirit:
	I cannot live to hear the news from England;
	But I do prophesy the election lights
	On Fortinbras: he has my dying voice;
	So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less,
	Which have solicited. The rest is silence.

	Now cracks a noble heart. Good night sweet prince:
	And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!
	Why does the drum come hither?

	Where is this sight?

	What is it ye would see?
	If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.

	This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,
	What feast is toward in thine eternal cell,
	That thou so many princes at a shot
	So bloodily hast struck?

	The sight is dismal;
	And our affairs from England come too late:
	The ears are senseless that should give us hearing,
	To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd,
	That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead:
	Where should we have our thanks?

	Not from his mouth,
	Had it the ability of life to thank you:
	He never gave commandment for their death.
	But since, so jump upon this bloody question,
	You from the Polack wars, and you from England,
	Are here arrived give order that these bodies
	High on a stage be placed to the view;
	And let me speak to the yet unknowing world
	How these things came about: so shall you hear
	Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,
	Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,
	Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,
	And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
	Fall'n on the inventors' reads: all this can I
	Truly deliver.

	                  Let us haste to hear it,
	And call the noblest to the audience.
	For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune:
	I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,
	Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.

	Of that I shall have also cause to speak,
	And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more;
	But let this same be presently perform'd,
	Even while men's minds are wild; lest more mischance
	On plots and errors, happen.

	Let four captains
	Bear Hamlet, like a soldier, to the stage;
	For he was likely, had he been put on,
	To have proved most royally: and, for his passage,
	The soldiers' music and the rites of war
	Speak loudly for him.
	Take up the bodies: such a sight as this
	Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss.
	Go, bid the soldiers shoot.




	Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall
	And by the doom of death end woes and all.

	Merchant of Syracuse, plead no more;
	I am not partial to infringe our laws:
	The enmity and discord which of late
	Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke
	To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,
	Who wanting guilders to redeem their lives
	Have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
	Excludes all pity from our threatening looks.
	For, since the mortal and intestine jars
	'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,
	It hath in solemn synods been decreed
	Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,
	To admit no traffic to our adverse towns Nay, more,
	If any born at Ephesus be seen
	At any Syracusian marts and fairs;
	Again: if any Syracusian born
	Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies,
	His goods confiscate to the duke's dispose,
	Unless a thousand marks be levied,
	To quit the penalty and to ransom him.
	Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
	Cannot amount unto a hundred marks;
	Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.

	Yet this my comfort: when your words are done,
	My woes end likewise with the evening sun.

	Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause
	Why thou departed'st from thy native home
	And for what cause thou camest to Ephesus.

	A heavier task could not have been imposed
	Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable:
	Yet, that the world may witness that my end
	Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence,
	I'll utter what my sorrows give me leave.
	In Syracusa was I born, and wed
	Unto a woman, happy but for me,
	And by me, had not our hap been bad.
	With her I lived in joy; our wealth increased
	By prosperous voyages I often made
	To Epidamnum; till my factor's death
	And the great care of goods at random left
	Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse:
	From whom my absence was not six months old
	Before herself, almost at fainting under
	The pleasing punishment that women bear,
	Had made provision for her following me
	And soon and safe arrived where I was.
	There had she not been long, but she became
	A joyful mother of two goodly sons;
	And, which was strange, the one so like the other,
	As could not be distinguish'd but by names.
	That very hour, and in the self-same inn,
	A meaner woman was delivered
	Of such a burden, male twins, both alike:
	Those,--for their parents were exceeding poor,--
	I bought and brought up to attend my sons.
	My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
	Made daily motions for our home return:
	Unwilling I agreed. Alas! too soon,
	We came aboard.
	A league from Epidamnum had we sail'd,
	Before the always wind-obeying deep
	Gave any tragic instance of our harm:
	But longer did we not retain much hope;
	For what obscured light the heavens did grant
	Did but convey unto our fearful minds
	A doubtful warrant of immediate death;
	Which though myself would gladly have embraced,
	Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
	Weeping before for what she saw must come,
	And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
	That mourn'd for fashion, ignorant what to fear,
	Forced me to seek delays for them and me.
	And this it was, for other means was none:
	The sailors sought for safety by our boat,
	And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us:
	My wife, more careful for the latter-born,
	Had fasten'd him unto a small spare mast,
	Such as seafaring men provide for storms;
	To him one of the other twins was bound,
	Whilst I had been like heedful of the other:
	The children thus disposed, my wife and I,
	Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fix'd,
	Fasten'd ourselves at either end the mast;
	And floating straight, obedient to the stream,
	Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.
	At length the sun, gazing upon the earth,
	Dispersed those vapours that offended us;
	And by the benefit of his wished light,
	The seas wax'd calm, and we discovered
	Two ships from far making amain to us,
	Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this:
	But ere they came,--O, let me say no more!
	Gather the sequel by that went before.

	Nay, forward, old man; do not break off so;
	For we may pity, though not pardon thee.

	O, had the gods done so, I had not now
	Worthily term'd them merciless to us!
	For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
	We were encounterd by a mighty rock;
	Which being violently borne upon,
	Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst;
	So that, in this unjust divorce of us,
	Fortune had left to both of us alike
	What to delight in, what to sorrow for.
	Her part, poor soul! seeming as burdened
	With lesser weight but not with lesser woe,
	Was carried with more speed before the wind;
	And in our sight they three were taken up
	By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
	At length, another ship had seized on us;
	And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
	Gave healthful welcome to their shipwreck'd guests;
	And would have reft the fishers of their prey,
	Had not their bark been very slow of sail;
	And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
	Thus have you heard me sever'd from my bliss;
	That by misfortunes was my life prolong'd,
	To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.

	And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,
	Do me the favour to dilate at full
	What hath befall'n of them and thee till now.

	My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
	At eighteen years became inquisitive
	After his brother: and importuned me
	That his attendant--so his case was like,
	Reft of his brother, but retain'd his name--
	Might bear him company in the quest of him:
	Whom whilst I labour'd of a love to see,
	I hazarded the loss of whom I loved.
	Five summers have I spent in furthest Greece,
	Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
	And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus;
	Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
	Or that or any place that harbours men.
	But here must end the story of my life;
	And happy were I in my timely death,
	Could all my travels warrant me they live.

	Hapless AEgeon, whom the fates have mark'd
	To bear the extremity of dire mishap!
	Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,
	Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,
	Which princes, would they, may not disannul,
	My soul would sue as advocate for thee.
	But, though thou art adjudged to the death
	And passed sentence may not be recall'd
	But to our honour's great disparagement,
	Yet I will favour thee in what I can.
	Therefore, merchant, I'll limit thee this day
	To seek thy life by beneficial help:
	Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus;
	Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
	And live; if no, then thou art doom'd to die.
	Gaoler, take him to thy custody.

	I will, my lord.

	Hopeless and helpless doth AEgeon wend,
	But to procrastinate his lifeless end.

	Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum,
	Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.
	This very day a Syracusian merchant
	Is apprehended for arrival here;
	And not being able to buy out his life
	According to the statute of the town,
	Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.
	There is your money that I had to keep.

	Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,
	And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.
	Within this hour it will be dinner-time:
	Till that, I'll view the manners of the town,
	Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
	And then return and sleep within mine inn,
	For with long travel I am stiff and weary.
	Get thee away.

	Many a man would take you at your word,
	And go indeed, having so good a mean.

	A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,
	When I am dull with care and melancholy,
	Lightens my humour with his merry jests.
	What, will you walk with me about the town,
	And then go to my inn and dine with me?

	I am invited, sir, to certain merchants,
	Of whom I hope to make much benefit;
	I crave your pardon. Soon at five o'clock,
	Please you, I'll meet with you upon the mart
	And afterward consort you till bed-time:
	My present business calls me from you now.

	Farewell till then: I will go lose myself
	And wander up and down to view the city.

	Sir, I commend you to your own content.

	He that commends me to mine own content
	Commends me to the thing I cannot get.
	I to the world am like a drop of water
	That in the ocean seeks another drop,
	Who, falling there to find his fellow forth,
	Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself:
	So I, to find a mother and a brother,
	In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.

	Here comes the almanac of my true date.
	What now? how chance thou art return'd so soon?

	Return'd so soon! rather approach'd too late:
	The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit,
	The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell;
	My mistress made it one upon my cheek:
	She is so hot because the meat is cold;
	The meat is cold because you come not home;
	You come not home because you have no stomach;
	You have no stomach having broke your fast;
	But we that know what 'tis to fast and pray
	Are penitent for your default to-day.

	Stop in your wind, sir: tell me this, I pray:
	Where have you left the money that I gave you?

	O,--sixpence, that I had o' Wednesday last
	To pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper?
	The saddler had it, sir; I kept it not.

	I am not in a sportive humour now:
	Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?
	We being strangers here, how darest thou trust
	So great a charge from thine own custody?

	I pray you, air, as you sit at dinner:
	I from my mistress come to you in post;
	If I return, I shall be post indeed,
	For she will score your fault upon my pate.
	Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock,
	And strike you home without a messenger.

	Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season;
	Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.
	Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?

	To me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me.

	Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,
	And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.

	My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
	Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner:
	My mistress and her sister stays for you.

	In what safe place you have bestow'd my money,
	Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
	That stands on tricks when I am undisposed:
	Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?

	I have some marks of yours upon my pate,
	Some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders,
	But not a thousand marks between you both.
	If I should pay your worship those again,
	Perchance you will not bear them patiently.

	Thy mistress' marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?


	Your worship's wife, my mistress at the Phoenix;
	She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,
	And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.

	What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,
	Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.

	What mean you, sir? for God's sake, hold your hands!
	Nay, and you will not, sir, I'll take my heels.

	Upon my life, by some device or other
	The villain is o'er-raught of all my money.
	They say this town is full of cozenage,
	As, nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
	Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind,
	Soul-killing witches that deform the body,
	Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks,
	And many such-like liberties of sin:
	If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.
	I'll to the Centaur, to go seek this slave:
	I greatly fear my money is not safe.

	Neither my husband nor the slave return'd,
	That in such haste I sent to seek his master!
	Sure, Luciana, it is two o'clock.

	Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,
	And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner.
	Good sister, let us dine and never fret:
	A man is master of his liberty:
	Time is their master, and, when they see time,
	They'll go or come: if so, be patient, sister.

	Why should their liberty than ours be more?

	Because their business still lies out o' door.

	Look, when I serve him so, he takes it ill.

	O, know he is the bridle of your will.

	There's none but asses will be bridled so.

	Why, headstrong liberty is lash'd with woe.
	There's nothing situate under heaven's eye
	But hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky:
	The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls,
	Are their males' subjects and at their controls:
	Men, more divine, the masters of all these,
	Lords of the wide world and wild watery seas,
	Indued with intellectual sense and souls,
	Of more preeminence than fish and fowls,
	Are masters to their females, and their lords:
	Then let your will attend on their accords.

	This servitude makes you to keep unwed.

	Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.

	But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.

	Ere I learn love, I'll practise to obey.

	How if your husband start some other where?

	Till he come home again, I would forbear.

	Patience unmoved! no marvel though she pause;
	They can be meek that have no other cause.
	A wretched soul, bruised with adversity,
	We bid be quiet when we hear it cry;
	But were we burdened with like weight of pain,
	As much or more would we ourselves complain:
	So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
	With urging helpless patience wouldst relieve me,
	But, if thou live to see like right bereft,
	This fool-begg'd patience in thee will be left.

	Well, I will marry one day, but to try.
	Here comes your man; now is your husband nigh.

	Say, is your tardy master now at hand?

	Nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two ears
	can witness.

	Say, didst thou speak with him? know'st thou his mind?

	Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear:
	Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.

	Spake he so doubtfully, thou couldst not feel his meaning?

	Nay, he struck so plainly, I could too well feel his
	blows; and withal so doubtfully that I could scarce
	understand them.

	But say, I prithee, is he coming home? It seems he
	hath great care to please his wife.

	Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad.

	Horn-mad, thou villain!

	I mean not cuckold-mad;
	But, sure, he is stark mad.
	When I desired him to come home to dinner,
	He ask'd me for a thousand marks in gold:
	''Tis dinner-time,' quoth I; 'My gold!' quoth he;
	'Your meat doth burn,' quoth I; 'My gold!' quoth he:
	'Will you come home?' quoth I; 'My gold!' quoth he.
	'Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?'
	'The pig,' quoth I, 'is burn'd;' 'My gold!' quoth he:
	'My mistress, sir' quoth I; 'Hang up thy mistress!
	I know not thy mistress; out on thy mistress!'

	Quoth who?

	Quoth my master:
	'I know,' quoth he, 'no house, no wife, no mistress.'
	So that my errand, due unto my tongue,
	I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders;
	For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.

	Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.

	Go back again, and be new beaten home?
	For God's sake, send some other messenger.

	Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across.

	And he will bless that cross with other beating:
	Between you I shall have a holy head.

	Hence, prating peasant! fetch thy master home.

	Am I so round with you as you with me,
	That like a football you do spurn me thus?
	You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither:
	If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.

	Fie, how impatience loureth in your face!

	His company must do his minions grace,
	Whilst I at home starve for a merry look.
	Hath homely age the alluring beauty took
	From my poor cheek? then he hath wasted it:
	Are my discourses dull? barren my wit?
	If voluble and sharp discourse be marr'd,
	Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard:
	Do their gay vestments his affections bait?
	That's not my fault: he's master of my state:
	What ruins are in me that can be found,
	By him not ruin'd? then is he the ground
	Of my defeatures. My decayed fair
	A sunny look of his would soon repair
	But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale
	And feeds from home; poor I am but his stale.

	Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence!

	Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.
	I know his eye doth homage otherwhere,
	Or else what lets it but he would be here?
	Sister, you know he promised me a chain;
	Would that alone, alone he would detain,
	So he would keep fair quarter with his bed!
	I see the jewel best enamelled
	Will lose his beauty; yet the gold bides still,
	That others touch, and often touching will
	Wear gold: and no man that hath a name,
	By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.
	Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
	I'll weep what's left away, and weeping die.

	How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!

	The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
	Safe at the Centaur; and the heedful slave
	Is wander'd forth, in care to seek me out
	By computation and mine host's report.
	I could not speak with Dromio since at first
	I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.

	How now sir! is your merry humour alter'd?
	As you love strokes, so jest with me again.
	You know no Centaur? you received no gold?
	Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner?
	My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad,
	That thus so madly thou didst answer me?

	What answer, sir? when spake I such a word?

	Even now, even here, not half an hour since.

	I did not see you since you sent me hence,
	Home to the Centaur, with the gold you gave me.

	Villain, thou didst deny the gold's receipt,
	And told'st me of a mistress and a dinner;
	For which, I hope, thou felt'st I was displeased.

	I am glad to see you in this merry vein:
	What means this jest? I pray you, master, tell me.

	Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?
	Think'st thou I jest? Hold, take thou that, and that.

	Hold, sir, for God's sake! now your jest is earnest:
	Upon what bargain do you give it me?

	Because that I familiarly sometimes
	Do use you for my fool and chat with you,
	Your sauciness will jest upon my love
	And make a common of my serious hours.
	When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,
	But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.
	If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
	And fashion your demeanor to my looks,
	Or I will beat this method in your sconce.

	Sconce call you it? so you would leave battering, I
	had rather have it a head: an you use these blows
	long, I must get a sconce for my head and ensconce
	it too; or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders.
	But, I pray, sir why am I beaten?

	Dost thou not know?

	Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.

	Shall I tell you why?

	Ay, sir, and wherefore; for they say every why hath
	a wherefore.

	Why, first,--for flouting me; and then, wherefore--
	For urging it the second time to me.

	Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
	When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme
	nor reason?
	Well, sir, I thank you.

	Thank me, sir, for what?

	Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.

	I'll make you amends next, to give you nothing for
	something. But say, sir, is it dinner-time?

	No, sir; I think the meat wants that I have.

	In good time, sir; what's that?

	Basting.

	Well, sir, then 'twill be dry.

	If it be, sir, I pray you, eat none of it.

	Your reason?

	Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another
	dry basting.

	Well, sir, learn to jest in good time: there's a
	time for all things.

	I durst have denied that, before you were so choleric.

	By what rule, sir?

	Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald
	pate of father Time himself.

	Let's hear it.

	There's no time for a man to recover his hair that
	grows bald by nature.

	May he not do it by fine and recovery?

	Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig and recover the
	lost hair of another man.

	Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is,
	so plentiful an excrement?

	Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts;
	and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath given them in wit.

	Why, but there's many a man hath more hair than wit.

	Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.

	Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.

	The plainer dealer, the sooner lost: yet he loseth
	it in a kind of jollity.

	For what reason?

	For two; and sound ones too.

	Nay, not sound, I pray you.

	Sure ones, then.

	Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.

	Certain ones then.

	Name them.

	The one, to save the money that he spends in
	trimming; the other, that at dinner they should not
	drop in his porridge.

	You would all this time have proved there is no
	time for all things.

	Marry, and did, sir; namely, no time to recover hair
	lost by nature.

	But your reason was not substantial, why there is no
	time to recover.

	Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald and therefore
	to the world's end will have bald followers.

	I knew 'twould be a bald conclusion:
	But, soft! who wafts us yonder?

	Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown:
	Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects;
	I am not Adriana nor thy wife.
	The time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow
	That never words were music to thine ear,
	That never object pleasing in thine eye,
	That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
	That never meat sweet-savor'd in thy taste,
	Unless I spake, or look'd, or touch'd, or carved to thee.
	How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it,
	That thou art thus estranged from thyself?
	Thyself I call it, being strange to me,
	That, undividable, incorporate,
	Am better than thy dear self's better part.
	Ah, do not tear away thyself from me!
	For know, my love, as easy mayest thou fall
	A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
	And take unmingled that same drop again,
	Without addition or diminishing,
	As take from me thyself and not me too.
	How dearly would it touch me to the quick,
	Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious
	And that this body, consecrate to thee,
	By ruffian lust should be contaminate!
	Wouldst thou not spit at me and spurn at me
	And hurl the name of husband in my face
	And tear the stain'd skin off my harlot-brow
	And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring
	And break it with a deep-divorcing vow?
	I know thou canst; and therefore see thou do it.
	I am possess'd with an adulterate blot;
	My blood is mingled with the crime of lust:
	For if we too be one and thou play false,
	I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
	Being strumpeted by thy contagion.
	Keep then far league and truce with thy true bed;
	I live unstain'd, thou undishonoured.

	Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not:
	In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
	As strange unto your town as to your talk;
	Who, every word by all my wit being scann'd,
	Want wit in all one word to understand.

	Fie, brother! how the world is changed with you!
	When were you wont to use my sister thus?
	She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.

	By Dromio?

	By me?

	By thee; and this thou didst return from him,
	That he did buffet thee, and, in his blows,
	Denied my house for his, me for his wife.

	Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman?
	What is the course and drift of your compact?

	I, sir? I never saw her till this time.

	Villain, thou liest; for even her very words
	Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.

	I never spake with her in all my life.

	How can she thus then call us by our names,
	Unless it be by inspiration.

	How ill agrees it with your gravity
	To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
	Abetting him to thwart me in my mood!
	Be it my wrong you are from me exempt,
	But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
	Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine:
	Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,
	Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,
	Makes me with thy strength to communicate:
	If aught possess thee from me, it is dross,
	Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss;
	Who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion
	Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.

	To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme:
	What, was I married to her in my dream?
	Or sleep I now and think I hear all this?
	What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?
	Until I know this sure uncertainty,
	I'll entertain the offer'd fallacy.

	Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.

	O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner.
	This is the fairy land: O spite of spites!
	We talk with goblins, owls and sprites:
	If we obey them not, this will ensue,
	They'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.

	Why pratest thou to thyself and answer'st not?
	Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot!

	I am transformed, master, am I not?

	I think thou art in mind, and so am I.

	Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.

	Thou hast thine own form.

	No, I am an ape.

	If thou art changed to aught, 'tis to an ass.

	'Tis true; she rides me and I long for grass.
	'Tis so, I am an ass; else it could never be
	But I should know her as well as she knows me.

	Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
	To put the finger in the eye and weep,
	Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn.
	Come, sir, to dinner. Dromio, keep the gate.
	Husband, I'll dine above with you to-day
	And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks.
	Sirrah, if any ask you for your master,
	Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.
	Come, sister. Dromio, play the porter well.

	Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?
	Sleeping or waking? mad or well-advised?
	Known unto these, and to myself disguised!
	I'll say as they say and persever so,
	And in this mist at all adventures go.

	Master, shall I be porter at the gate?

	Ay; and let none enter, lest I break your pate.

	Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.

	Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all;
	My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours:
	Say that I linger'd with you at your shop
	To see the making of her carcanet,
	And that to-morrow you will bring it home.
	But here's a villain that would face me down
	He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
	And charged him with a thousand marks in gold,
	And that I did deny my wife and house.
	Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?

	Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know;
	That you beat me at the mart, I have your hand to show:
	If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
	Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.

	I think thou art an ass.

	Marry, so it doth appear
	By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.
	I should kick, being kick'd; and, being at that pass,
	You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.

	You're sad, Signior Balthazar: pray God our cheer
	May answer my good will and your good welcome here.

	I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your
	welcome dear.

	O, Signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish,
	A table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.

	Good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.

	And welcome more common; for that's nothing but words.

	Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.

	Ay, to a niggardly host, and more sparing guest:
	But though my cates be mean, take them in good part;
	Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
	But, soft! my door is lock'd. Go bid them let us in.

	Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicel, Gillian, Ginn!

	Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb,
	idiot, patch!
	Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.
	Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call'st
	for such store,
	When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.

	What patch is made our porter? My master stays in
	the street.

	Let him walk from whence he came, lest he
	catch cold on's feet.

	Who talks within there? ho, open the door!

	Right, sir; I'll tell you when, an you tell
	me wherefore.

	Wherefore? for my dinner: I have not dined to-day.

	Nor to-day here you must not; come again
	when you may.

	What art thou that keepest me out from the house I owe?

	The porter for this time, sir, and my name
	is Dromio.

	O villain! thou hast stolen both mine office and my name.
	The one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame.
	If thou hadst been Dromio to-day in my place,
	Thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name or thy
	name for an ass.

	What a coil is there, Dromio? who are those
	at the gate?

		Let my master in, Luce.

	Faith, no; he comes too late;
	And so tell your master.

	O Lord, I must laugh!
	Have at you with a proverb--Shall I set in my staff?

	Have at you with another; that's--When?
	can you tell?

	If thy name be call'd Luce--Luce, thou hast
	answered him well.

	Do you hear, you minion? you'll let us in, I hope?

	I thought to have asked you.

	And you said no.

	So, come, help: well struck! there was blow for blow.

	Thou baggage, let me in.

	Can you tell for whose sake?

	Master, knock the door hard.

	Let him knock till it ache.

	You'll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.

	What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?

	Who is that at the door that keeps all
	this noise?

	By my troth, your town is troubled with
	unruly boys.

	Are you there, wife? you might have come before.

	Your wife, sir knave! go get you from the door.

	If you went in pain, master, this 'knave' would go sore.

	Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome: we would
	fain have either.

	In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.

	They stand at the door, master; bid them welcome hither.

	There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.

	You would say so, master, if your garments were thin.
	Your cake there is warm within; you stand here in the cold:
	It would make a man mad as a buck, to be so bought and sold.

	Go fetch me something: I'll break ope the gate.

	Break any breaking here, and I'll break your
	knave's pate.

	A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind,
	Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.

	It seems thou want'st breaking: out upon
	thee, hind!

	Here's too much 'out upon thee!' I pray thee,
	let me in.

	Ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.

	Well, I'll break in: go borrow me a crow.

	A crow without feather? Master, mean you so?
	For a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather;
	If a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow together.

	Go get thee gone; fetch me an iron crow.

	Have patience, sir; O, let it not be so!
	Herein you war against your reputation
	And draw within the compass of suspect
	The unviolated honour of your wife.
	Once this,--your long experience of her wisdom,
	Her sober virtue, years and modesty,
	Plead on her part some cause to you unknown:
	And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse
	Why at this time the doors are made against you.
	Be ruled by me: depart in patience,
	And let us to the Tiger all to dinner,
	And about evening come yourself alone
	To know the reason of this strange restraint.
	If by strong hand you offer to break in
	Now in the stirring passage of the day,
	A vulgar comment will be made of it,
	And that supposed by the common rout
	Against your yet ungalled estimation
	That may with foul intrusion enter in
	And dwell upon your grave when you are dead;
	For slander lives upon succession,
	For ever housed where it gets possession.

	You have prevailed: I will depart in quiet,
	And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry.
	I know a wench of excellent discourse,
	Pretty and witty; wild, and yet, too, gentle:
	There will we dine. This woman that I mean,
	My wife--but, I protest, without desert--
	Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal:
	To her will we to dinner.

		    Get you home
	And fetch the chain; by this I know 'tis made:
	Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine;
	For there's the house: that chain will I bestow--
	Be it for nothing but to spite my wife--
	Upon mine hostess there: good sir, make haste.
	Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
	I'll knock elsewhere, to see if they'll disdain me.

	I'll meet you at that place some hour hence.

	Do so. This jest shall cost me some expense.

	And may it be that you have quite forgot
	A husband's office? shall, Antipholus.
	Even in the spring of love, thy love-springs rot?
	Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous?
	If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
	Then for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness:
	Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth;
	Muffle your false love with some show of blindness:
	Let not my sister read it in your eye;
	Be not thy tongue thy own shame's orator;
	Look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty;
	Apparel vice like virtue's harbinger;
	Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted;
	Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint;
	Be secret-false: what need she be acquainted?
	What simple thief brags of his own attaint?
	'Tis double wrong, to truant with your bed
	And let her read it in thy looks at board:
	Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed;
	Ill deeds are doubled with an evil word.
	Alas, poor women! make us but believe,
	Being compact of credit, that you love us;
	Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve;
	We in your motion turn and you may move us.
	Then, gentle brother, get you in again;
	Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife:
	'Tis holy sport to be a little vain,
	When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.

	Sweet mistress--what your name is else, I know not,
	Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine,--
	Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not
	Than our earth's wonder, more than earth divine.
	Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak;
	Lay open to my earthy-gross conceit,
	Smother'd in errors, feeble, shallow, weak,
	The folded meaning of your words' deceit.
	Against my soul's pure truth why labour you
	To make it wander in an unknown field?
	Are you a god? would you create me new?
	Transform me then, and to your power I'll yield.
	But if that I am I, then well I know
	Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
	Nor to her bed no homage do I owe
	Far more, far more to you do I decline.
	O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note,
	To drown me in thy sister's flood of tears:
	Sing, siren, for thyself and I will dote:
	Spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs,
	And as a bed I'll take them and there lie,
	And in that glorious supposition think
	He gains by death that hath such means to die:
	Let Love, being light, be drowned if she sink!

	What, are you mad, that you do reason so?

	Not mad, but mated; how, I do not know.

	It is a fault that springeth from your eye.

	For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.

	Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.

	As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.

	Why call you me love? call my sister so.

	Thy sister's sister.

	That's my sister.

	No;
	It is thyself, mine own self's better part,
	Mine eye's clear eye, my dear heart's dearer heart,
	My food, my fortune and my sweet hope's aim,
	My sole earth's heaven and my heaven's claim.

	All this my sister is, or else should be.

	Call thyself sister, sweet, for I am thee.
	Thee will I love and with thee lead my life:
	Thou hast no husband yet nor I no wife.
	Give me thy hand.

	                  O, soft, air! hold you still:
	I'll fetch my sister, to get her good will.

	Why, how now, Dromio! where runn'st thou so fast?

	Do you know me, sir? am I Dromio? am I your man?
	am I myself?

	Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.

	I am an ass, I am a woman's man and besides myself.

	What woman's man? and how besides thyself? besides thyself?

	Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a woman; one
	that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.

	What claim lays she to thee?

	Marry sir, such claim as you would lay to your
	horse; and she would have me as a beast: not that, I
	being a beast, she would have me; but that she,
	being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.

	What is she?

	A very reverent body; ay, such a one as a man may
	not speak of without he say 'Sir-reverence.' I have
	but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a
	wondrous fat marriage.

	How dost thou mean a fat marriage?

	Marry, sir, she's the kitchen wench and all grease;
	and I know not what use to put her to but to make a
	lamp of her and run from her by her own light. I
	warrant, her rags and the tallow in them will burn a
	Poland winter: if she lives till doomsday,
	she'll burn a week longer than the whole world.

	What complexion is she of?

	Swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing half so
	clean kept: for why, she sweats; a man may go over
	shoes in the grime of it.

	That's a fault that water will mend.

	No, sir, 'tis in grain; Noah's flood could not do it.

	What's her name?

	Nell, sir; but her name and three quarters, that's
	an ell and three quarters, will not measure her from
	hip to hip.

	Then she bears some breadth?

	No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip:
	she is spherical, like a globe; I could find out
	countries in her.

	In what part of her body stands Ireland?

	Marry, in her buttocks: I found it out by the bogs.

	Where Scotland?

	I found it by the barrenness; hard in the palm of the hand.

	Where France?

	In her forehead; armed and reverted, making war
	against her heir.

	Where England?

	I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could find no
	whiteness in them; but I guess it stood in her chin,
	by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.

	Where Spain?

	Faith, I saw it not; but I felt it hot in her breath.

	Where America, the Indies?

	Oh, sir, upon her nose all o'er embellished with
	rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich
	aspect to the hot breath of Spain; who sent whole
	armadoes of caracks to be ballast at her nose.

	Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?

	Oh, sir, I did not look so low. To conclude, this
	drudge, or diviner, laid claim to me, call'd me
	Dromio; swore I was assured to her; told me what
	privy marks I had about me, as, the mark of my
	shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my
	left arm, that I amazed ran from her as a witch:
	And, I think, if my breast had not been made of
	faith and my heart of steel,
	She had transform'd me to a curtal dog and made
	me turn i' the wheel.

	Go hie thee presently, post to the road:
	An if the wind blow any way from shore,
	I will not harbour in this town to-night:
	If any bark put forth, come to the mart,
	Where I will walk till thou return to me.
	If every one knows us and we know none,
	'Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack and be gone.

	As from a bear a man would run for life,
	So fly I from her that would be my wife.

	There's none but witches do inhabit here;
	And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence.
	She that doth call me husband, even my soul
	Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister,
	Possess'd with such a gentle sovereign grace,
	Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
	Hath almost made me traitor to myself:
	But, lest myself be guilty to self-wrong,
	I'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song.

	Master Antipholus,--

	Ay, that's my name.

	I know it well, sir, lo, here is the chain.
	I thought to have ta'en you at the Porpentine:
	The chain unfinish'd made me stay thus long.

	What is your will that I shall do with this?

	What please yourself, sir: I have made it for you.

	Made it for me, sir! I bespoke it not.

	Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have.
	Go home with it and please your wife withal;
	And soon at supper-time I'll visit you
	And then receive my money for the chain.

	I pray you, sir, receive the money now,
	For fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.

	You are a merry man, sir: fare you well.

	What I should think of this, I cannot tell:
	But this I think, there's no man is so vain
	That would refuse so fair an offer'd chain.
	I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
	When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
	I'll to the mart, and there for Dromio stay
	If any ship put out, then straight away.

	You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
	And since I have not much importuned you;
	Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
	To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage:
	Therefore make present satisfaction,
	Or I'll attach you by this officer.

	Even just the sum that I do owe to you
	Is growing to me by Antipholus,
	And in the instant that I met with you
	He had of me a chain: at five o'clock
	I shall receive the money for the same.
	Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,
	I will discharge my bond and thank you too.

	That labour may you save: see where he comes.

	While I go to the goldsmith's house, go thou
	And buy a rope's end: that will I bestow
	Among my wife and her confederates,
	For locking me out of my doors by day.
	But, soft! I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone;
	Buy thou a rope and bring it home to me.

	I buy a thousand pound a year: I buy a rope.

	A man is well holp up that trusts to you:
	I promised your presence and the chain;
	But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
	Belike you thought our love would last too long,
	If it were chain'd together, and therefore came not.

	Saving your merry humour, here's the note
	How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
	The fineness of the gold and chargeful fashion.
	Which doth amount to three odd ducats more
	Than I stand debted to this gentleman:
	I pray you, see him presently discharged,
	For he is bound to sea and stays but for it.

	I am not furnish'd with the present money;
	Besides, I have some business in the town.
	Good signior, take the stranger to my house
	And with you take the chain and bid my wife
	Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof:
	Perchance I will be there as soon as you.

	Then you will bring the chain to her yourself?

	No; bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.

	Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?

	An if I have not, sir, I hope you have;
	Or else you may return without your money.

	Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain:
	Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
	And I, to blame, have held him here too long.

	Good Lord! you use this dalliance to excuse
	Your breach of promise to the Porpentine.
	I should have chid you for not bringing it,
	But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.

	The hour steals on; I pray you, sir, dispatch.

	You hear how he importunes me;--the chain!

	Why, give it to my wife and fetch your money.

	Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.
	Either send the chain or send me by some token.

	Fie, now you run this humour out of breath,
	where's the chain? I pray you, let me see it.

	My business cannot brook this dalliance.
	Good sir, say whether you'll answer me or no:
	If not, I'll leave him to the officer.

	I answer you! what should I answer you?

	The money that you owe me for the chain.

	I owe you none till I receive the chain.

	You know I gave it you half an hour since.

	You gave me none: you wrong me much to say so.

	You wrong me more, sir, in denying it:
	Consider how it stands upon my credit.

	Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.

	I do; and charge you in the duke's name to obey me.

	This touches me in reputation.
	Either consent to pay this sum for me
	Or I attach you by this officer.

	Consent to pay thee that I never had!
	Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou darest.

	Here is thy fee; arrest him, officer,
	I would not spare my brother in this case,
	If he should scorn me so apparently.

	I do arrest you, sir: you hear the suit.

	I do obey thee till I give thee bail.
	But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear
	As all the metal in your shop will answer.

	Sir, sir, I will have law in Ephesus,
	To your notorious shame; I doubt it not.

	Master, there is a bark of Epidamnum
	That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
	And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,
	I have convey'd aboard; and I have bought
	The oil, the balsamum and aqua-vitae.
	The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
	Blows fair from land: they stay for nought at all
	But for their owner, master, and yourself.

	How now! a madman! Why, thou peevish sheep,
	What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?

	A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.

	Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope;
	And told thee to what purpose and what end.

	You sent me for a rope's end as soon:
	You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.

	I will debate this matter at more leisure
	And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
	To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight:
	Give her this key, and tell her, in the desk
	That's cover'd o'er with Turkish tapestry,
	There is a purse of ducats; let her send it:
	Tell her I am arrested in the street
	And that shall bail me; hie thee, slave, be gone!
	On, officer, to prison till it come.

	To Adriana! that is where we dined,
	Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband:
	She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.
	Thither I must, although against my will,
	For servants must their masters' minds fulfil.

	Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
	Mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye
	That he did plead in earnest? yea or no?
	Look'd he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?
	What observation madest thou in this case
	Of his heart's meteors tilting in his face?

	First he denied you had in him no right.

	He meant he did me none; the more my spite.

	Then swore he that he was a stranger here.

	And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.

	Then pleaded I for you.

	And what said he?

	That love I begg'd for you he begg'd of me.

	With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?

	With words that in an honest suit might move.
	First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.

	Didst speak him fair?

	Have patience, I beseech.

	I cannot, nor I will not, hold me still;
	My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
	He is deformed, crooked, old and sere,
	Ill-faced, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere;
	Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind;
	Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.

	Who would be jealous then of such a one?
	No evil lost is wail'd when it is gone.

	Ah, but I think him better than I say,
	And yet would herein others' eyes were worse.
	Far from her nest the lapwing cries away:
	My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.

	Here! go; the desk, the purse! sweet, now, make haste.

	How hast thou lost thy breath?

	By running fast.

	Where is thy master, Dromio? is he well?

	No, he's in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.
	A devil in an everlasting garment hath him;
	One whose hard heart is button'd up with steel;
	A fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough;
	A wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff;
	A back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that
	countermands
	The passages of alleys, creeks and narrow lands;
	A hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well;
	One that before the judgement carries poor souls to hell.

	Why, man, what is the matter?

	I do not know the matter: he is 'rested on the case.

	What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit.

	I know not at whose suit he is arrested well;
	But he's in a suit of buff which 'rested him, that can I tell.
	Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?

	Go fetch it, sister.

	[Exit Luciana]

		This I wonder at,
	That he, unknown to me, should be in debt.
	Tell me, was he arrested on a band?

	Not on a band, but on a stronger thing;
	A chain, a chain! Do you not hear it ring?

	What, the chain?

	No, no, the bell: 'tis time that I were gone:
	It was two ere I left him, and now the clock
	strikes one.

	The hours come back! that did I never hear.

	O, yes; if any hour meet a sergeant, a' turns back for
	very fear.

	As if Time were in debt! how fondly dost thou reason!

	Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than he's
	worth, to season.
	Nay, he's a thief too: have you not heard men say
	That Time comes stealing on by night and day?
	If Time be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
	Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?

	Go, Dromio; there's the money, bear it straight;
	And bring thy master home immediately.
	Come, sister: I am press'd down with conceit--
	Conceit, my comfort and my injury.

	There's not a man I meet but doth salute me
	As if I were their well-acquainted friend;
	And every one doth call me by my name.
	Some tender money to me; some invite me;
	Some other give me thanks for kindnesses;
	Some offer me commodities to buy:
	Even now a tailor call'd me in his shop
	And show'd me silks that he had bought for me,
	And therewithal took measure of my body.
	Sure, these are but imaginary wiles
	And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.

	Master, here's the gold you sent me for. What, have
	you got the picture of old Adam new-apparelled?

	What gold is this? what Adam dost thou mean?

	Not that Adam that kept the Paradise but that Adam
	that keeps the prison: he that goes in the calf's
	skin that was killed for the Prodigal; he that came
	behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you
	forsake your liberty.

	I understand thee not.

	No? why, 'tis a plain case: he that went, like a
	bass-viol, in a case of leather; the man, sir,
	that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob
	and 'rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed
	men and gives them suits of durance; he that sets up
	his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a
	morris-pike.

	What, thou meanest an officer?

	Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band, he that brings
	any man to answer it that breaks his band; one that
	thinks a man always going to bed, and says, 'God
	give you good rest!'

	Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is there any

	Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the
	bark Expedition put forth to-night; and then were
	you hindered by the sergeant, to tarry for the hoy
	Delay. Here are the angels that you sent for to
	deliver you.

	The fellow is distract, and so am I;
	And here we wander in illusions:
	Some blessed power deliver us from hence!

	Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.
	I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now:
	Is that the chain you promised me to-day?

	Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.

	Master, is this Mistress Satan?

	It is the devil.

	Nay, she is worse, she is the devil's dam; and here
	she comes in the habit of a light wench: and thereof
	comes that the wenches say 'God damn me;' that's as
	much to say 'God make me a light wench.' It is
	written, they appear to men like angels of light:
	light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn;
	ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not near her.

	Your man and you are marvellous merry, sir.
	Will you go with me? We'll mend our dinner here?

	Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat; or bespeak a
	long spoon.

	Why, Dromio?

	Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with
	the devil.

	Avoid then, fiend! what tell'st thou me of supping?
	Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress:
	I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.

	Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
	Or, for my diamond, the chain you promised,
	And I'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.

	Some devils ask but the parings of one's nail,
	A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,
	A nut, a cherry-stone;
	But she, more covetous, would have a chain.
	Master, be wise: an if you give it her,
	The devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.

	I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain:
	I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.

	Avaunt, thou witch! Come, Dromio, let us go.

	'Fly pride,' says the peacock: mistress, that you know.

	Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad,
	Else would he never so demean himself.
	A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats,
	And for the same he promised me a chain:
	Both one and other he denies me now.
	The reason that I gather he is mad,
	Besides this present instance of his rage,
	Is a mad tale he told to-day at dinner,
	Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
	Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits,
	On purpose shut the doors against his way.
	My way is now to hie home to his house,
	And tell his wife that, being lunatic,
	He rush'd into my house and took perforce
	My ring away. This course I fittest choose;
	For forty ducats is too much to lose.

	Fear me not, man; I will not break away:
	I'll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money,
	To warrant thee, as I am 'rested for.
	My wife is in a wayward mood to-day,
	And will not lightly trust the messenger
	That I should be attach'd in Ephesus,
	I tell you, 'twill sound harshly in her ears.

	Here comes my man; I think he brings the money.
	How now, sir! have you that I sent you for?

	Here's that, I warrant you, will pay them all.

	But where's the money?

	Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.

	Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?

	I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.

	To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?

	To a rope's-end, sir; and to that end am I returned.

	And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.

	Good sir, be patient.

	Nay, 'tis for me to be patient; I am in adversity.

	Good, now, hold thy tongue.

	Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.

	Thou whoreson, senseless villain!

	I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel
	your blows.

	Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an
	ass.

	I am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long
	ears. I have served him from the hour of my
	nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his
	hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he
	heats me with beating; when I am warm, he cools me
	with beating; I am waked with it when I sleep;
	raised with it when I sit; driven out of doors with
	it when I go from home; welcomed home with it when
	I return; nay, I bear it on my shoulders, as a
	beggar wont her brat; and, I think when he hath
	lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.

	Come, go along; my wife is coming yonder.

	Mistress, 'respice finem,' respect your end; or
	rather, the prophecy like the parrot, 'beware the
	rope's-end.'

	Wilt thou still talk?

	How say you now? is not your husband mad?

	His incivility confirms no less.
	Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer;
	Establish him in his true sense again,
	And I will please you what you will demand.

	Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!

	Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy!

	Give me your hand and let me feel your pulse.

	There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.

	I charge thee, Satan, housed within this man,
	To yield possession to my holy prayers
	And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight:
	I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven!

	Peace, doting wizard, peace! I am not mad.

	O, that thou wert not, poor distressed soul!

	You minion, you, are these your customers?
	Did this companion with the saffron face
	Revel and feast it at my house to-day,
	Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut
	And I denied to enter in my house?

	O husband, God doth know you dined at home;
	Where would you had remain'd until this time,
	Free from these slanders and this open shame!

	Dined at home! Thou villain, what sayest thou?

	Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.

	Were not my doors lock'd up and I shut out?

	Perdie, your doors were lock'd and you shut out.

	And did not she herself revile me there?

	Sans fable, she herself reviled you there.

	Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?

	Certes, she did; the kitchen-vestal scorn'd you.

	And did not I in rage depart from thence?

	In verity you did; my bones bear witness,
	That since have felt the vigour of his rage.

	Is't good to soothe him in these contraries?

	It is no shame: the fellow finds his vein,
	And yielding to him humours well his frenzy.

	Thou hast suborn'd the goldsmith to arrest me.

	Alas, I sent you money to redeem you,
	By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.

	Money by me! heart and goodwill you might;
	But surely master, not a rag of money.

	Went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?

	He came to me and I deliver'd it.

	And I am witness with her that she did.

	God and the rope-maker bear me witness
	That I was sent for nothing but a rope!

	Mistress, both man and master is possess'd;
	I know it by their pale and deadly looks:
	They must be bound and laid in some dark room.

	Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth to-day?
	And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?

	I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.

 	And, gentle master, I received no gold;
	But I confess, sir, that we were lock'd out.

	Dissembling villain, thou speak'st false in both.

	Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all;
	And art confederate with a damned pack
	To make a loathsome abject scorn of me:
	But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes
	That would behold in me this shameful sport.

	O, bind him, bind him! let him not come near me.

	More company! The fiend is strong within him.

	Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!

	What, will you murder me? Thou gaoler, thou,
	I am thy prisoner: wilt thou suffer them
	To make a rescue?

	                  Masters, let him go
	He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.

	Go bind this man, for he is frantic too.

	What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?
	Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
	Do outrage and displeasure to himself?

	He is my prisoner: if I let him go,
	The debt he owes will be required of me.

	I will discharge thee ere I go from thee:
	Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
	And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.
	Good master doctor, see him safe convey'd
	Home to my house. O most unhappy day!

	O most unhappy strumpet!

	Master, I am here entered in bond for you.

	Out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me?

	Will you be bound for nothing? be mad, good master:
	cry 'The devil!'

	God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!

	Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.

	Say now, whose suit is he arrested at?

	One Angelo, a goldsmith: do you know him?

	I know the man. What is the sum he owes?

	Two hundred ducats.

	Say, how grows it due?

	Due for a chain your husband had of him.

	He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.

	When as your husband all in rage to-day
	Came to my house and took away my ring--
	The ring I saw upon his finger now--
	Straight after did I meet him with a chain.

	It may be so, but I did never see it.
	Come, gaoler, bring me where the goldsmith is:
	I long to know the truth hereof at large.

	God, for thy mercy! they are loose again.

	And come with naked swords.
	Let's call more help to have them bound again.

	Away! they'll kill us.

	I see these witches are afraid of swords.

	She that would be your wife now ran from you.

	Come to the Centaur; fetch our stuff from thence:
	I long that we were safe and sound aboard.

	Faith, stay here this night; they will surely do us
	no harm: you saw they speak us fair, give us gold:
	methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for
	the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of
	me, I could find in my heart to stay here still and
	turn witch.

	I will not stay to-night for all the town;
	Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.

	I am sorry, sir, that I have hinder'd you;
	But, I protest, he had the chain of me,
	Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.

	How is the man esteemed here in the city?

	Of very reverend reputation, sir,
	Of credit infinite, highly beloved,
	Second to none that lives here in the city:
	His word might bear my wealth at any time.

	Speak softly; yonder, as I think, he walks.

	'Tis so; and that self chain about his neck
	Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
	Good sir, draw near to me, I'll speak to him.
	Signior Antipholus, I wonder much
	That you would put me to this shame and trouble;
	And, not without some scandal to yourself,
	With circumstance and oaths so to deny
	This chain which now you wear so openly:
	Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
	You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
	Who, but for staying on our controversy,
	Had hoisted sail and put to sea to-day:
	This chain you had of me; can you deny it?

	I think I had; I never did deny it.

	Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.

	Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?

	These ears of mine, thou know'st did hear thee.
	Fie on thee, wretch! 'tis pity that thou livest
	To walk where any honest man resort.

	Thou art a villain to impeach me thus:
	I'll prove mine honour and mine honesty
	Against thee presently, if thou darest stand.

	I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.

	Hold, hurt him not, for God's sake! he is mad.
	Some get within him, take his sword away:
	Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.

	Run, master, run; for God's sake, take a house!
	This is some priory. In, or we are spoil'd!

	Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?

	To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.
	Let us come in, that we may bind him fast
	And bear him home for his recovery.

	I knew he was not in his perfect wits.

	I am sorry now that I did draw on him.

	How long hath this possession held the man?

	This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,
	And much different from the man he was;
	But till this afternoon his passion
	Ne'er brake into extremity of rage.

	Hath he not lost much wealth by wreck of sea?
	Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye
	Stray'd his affection in unlawful love?
	A sin prevailing much in youthful men,
	Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing.
	Which of these sorrows is he subject to?

	To none of these, except it be the last;
	Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.

	You should for that have reprehended him.

	Why, so I did.

	                  Ay, but not rough enough.

	As roughly as my modesty would let me.

	Haply, in private.

	And in assemblies too.

	Ay, but not enough.

	It was the copy of our conference:
	In bed he slept not for my urging it;
	At board he fed not for my urging it;
	Alone, it was the subject of my theme;
	In company I often glanced it;
	Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.

	And thereof came it that the man was mad.
	The venom clamours of a jealous woman
	Poisons more deadly than a mad dog's tooth.
	It seems his sleeps were hinder'd by thy railing,
	And therefore comes it that his head is light.
	Thou say'st his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings:
	Unquiet meals make ill digestions;
	Thereof the raging fire of fever bred;
	And what's a fever but a fit of madness?
	Thou say'st his sports were hinderd by thy brawls:
	Sweet recreation barr'd, what doth ensue
	But moody and dull melancholy,
	Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
	And at her heels a huge infectious troop
	Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?
	In food, in sport and life-preserving rest
	To be disturb'd, would mad or man or beast:
	The consequence is then thy jealous fits
	Have scared thy husband from the use of wits.

	She never reprehended him but mildly,
	When he demean'd himself rough, rude and wildly.
	Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?

	She did betray me to my own reproof.
	Good people enter and lay hold on him.

	No, not a creature enters in my house.

	Then let your servants bring my husband forth.

	Neither: he took this place for sanctuary,
	And it shall privilege him from your hands
	Till I have brought him to his wits again,
	Or lose my labour in assaying it.

	I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
	Diet his sickness, for it is my office,
	And will have no attorney but myself;
	And therefore let me have him home with me.

	Be patient; for I will not let him stir
	Till I have used the approved means I have,
	With wholesome syrups, drugs and holy prayers,
	To make of him a formal man again:
	It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
	A charitable duty of my order.
	Therefore depart and leave him here with me.

	I will not hence and leave my husband here:
	And ill it doth beseem your holiness
	To separate the husband and the wife.

	Be quiet and depart: thou shalt not have him.

	Complain unto the duke of this indignity.

	Come, go: I will fall prostrate at his feet
	And never rise until my tears and prayers
	Have won his grace to come in person hither
	And take perforce my husband from the abbess.

	By this, I think, the dial points at five:
	Anon, I'm sure, the duke himself in person
	Comes this way to the melancholy vale,
	The place of death and sorry execution,
	Behind the ditches of the abbey here.

	Upon what cause?

	To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,
	Who put unluckily into this bay
	Against the laws and statutes of this town,
	Beheaded publicly for his offence.

	See where they come: we will behold his death.

	Kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey.

	Yet once again proclaim it publicly,
	If any friend will pay the sum for him,
	He shall not die; so much we tender him.

	Justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess!

	She is a virtuous and a reverend lady:
	It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.

	May it please your grace, Antipholus, my husband,
	Whom I made lord of me and all I had,
	At your important letters,--this ill day
	A most outrageous fit of madness took him;
	That desperately he hurried through the street,
	With him his bondman, all as mad as he--
	Doing displeasure to the citizens
	By rushing in their houses, bearing thence
	Rings, jewels, any thing his rage did like.
	Once did I get him bound and sent him home,
	Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
	That here and there his fury had committed.
	Anon, I wot not by what strong escape,
	He broke from those that had the guard of him;
	And with his mad attendant and himself,
	Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords,
	Met us again and madly bent on us,
	Chased us away; till, raising of more aid,
	We came again to bind them. Then they fled
	Into this abbey, whither we pursued them:
	And here the abbess shuts the gates on us
	And will not suffer us to fetch him out,
	Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence.
	Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command
	Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.

	Long since thy husband served me in my wars,
	And I to thee engaged a prince's word,
	When thou didst make him master of thy bed,
	To do him all the grace and good I could.
	Go, some of you, knock at the abbey-gate
	And bid the lady abbess come to me.
	I will determine this before I stir.

	O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself!
	My master and his man are both broke loose,
	Beaten the maids a-row and bound the doctor
	Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire;
	And ever, as it blazed, they threw on him
	Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair:
	My master preaches patience to him and the while
	His man with scissors nicks him like a fool,
	And sure, unless you send some present help,
	Between them they will kill the conjurer.

	Peace, fool! thy master and his man are here,
	And that is false thou dost report to us.

	Mistress, upon my life, I tell you true;
	I have not breathed almost since I did see it.
	He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you,
	To scorch your face and to disfigure you.

	Hark, hark! I hear him, mistress. fly, be gone!

	Come, stand by me; fear nothing. Guard with halberds!

	Ay me, it is my husband! Witness you,
	That he is borne about invisible:
	Even now we housed him in the abbey here;
	And now he's there, past thought of human reason.

	Justice, most gracious duke, O, grant me justice!
	Even for the service that long since I did thee,
	When I bestrid thee in the wars and took
	Deep scars to save thy life; even for the blood
	That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.

	Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,
	I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.

	Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there!
	She whom thou gavest to me to be my wife,
	That hath abused and dishonour'd me
	Even in the strength and height of injury!
	Beyond imagination is the wrong
	That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.

	Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.

	This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me,
	While she with harlots feasted in my house.

	A grievous fault! Say, woman, didst thou so?

	No, my good lord: myself, he and my sister
	To-day did dine together. So befall my soul
	As this is false he burdens me withal!

	Ne'er may I look on day, nor sleep on night,
	But she tells to your highness simple truth!

	O perjured woman! They are both forsworn:
	In this the madman justly chargeth them.

	My liege, I am advised what I say,
	Neither disturbed with the effect of wine,
	Nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire,
	Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
	This woman lock'd me out this day from dinner:
	That goldsmith there, were he not pack'd with her,
	Could witness it, for he was with me then;
	Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,
	Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
	Where Balthazar and I did dine together.
	Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
	I went to seek him: in the street I met him
	And in his company that gentleman.
	There did this perjured goldsmith swear me down
	That I this day of him received the chain,
	Which, God he knows, I saw not: for the which
	He did arrest me with an officer.
	I did obey, and sent my peasant home
	For certain ducats: he with none return'd
	Then fairly I bespoke the officer
	To go in person with me to my house.
	By the way we met
	My wife, her sister, and a rabble more
	Of vile confederates. Along with them
	They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain,
	A mere anatomy, a mountebank,
	A threadbare juggler and a fortune-teller,
	A needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch,
	A dead-looking man: this pernicious slave,
	Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer,
	And, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
	And with no face, as 'twere, outfacing me,
	Cries out, I was possess'd. Then all together
	They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence
	And in a dark and dankish vault at home
	There left me and my man, both bound together;
	Till, gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
	I gain'd my freedom, and immediately
	Ran hither to your grace; whom I beseech
	To give me ample satisfaction
	For these deep shames and great indignities.

	My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him,
	That he dined not at home, but was lock'd out.

	But had he such a chain of thee or no?

	He had, my lord: and when he ran in here,
	These people saw the chain about his neck.

	Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine
	Heard you confess you had the chain of him
	After you first forswore it on the mart:
	And thereupon I drew my sword on you;
	And then you fled into this abbey here,
	From whence, I think, you are come by miracle.

	I never came within these abbey-walls,
	Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me:
	I never saw the chain, so help me Heaven!
	And this is false you burden me withal.

	Why, what an intricate impeach is this!
	I think you all have drunk of Circe's cup.
	If here you housed him, here he would have been;
	If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly:
	You say he dined at home; the goldsmith here
	Denies that saying. Sirrah, what say you?

	Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.

	He did, and from my finger snatch'd that ring.

	'Tis true, my liege; this ring I had of her.

	Saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here?

	As sure, my liege, as I do see your grace.

	Why, this is strange. Go call the abbess hither.
	I think you are all mated or stark mad.

	Most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word:
	Haply I see a friend will save my life
	And pay the sum that may deliver me.

	Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.

	Is not your name, sir, call'd Antipholus?
	And is not that your bondman, Dromio?

 	Within this hour I was his bondman sir,
	But he, I thank him, gnaw'd in two my cords:
	Now am I Dromio and his man unbound.

	I am sure you both of you remember me.

	Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you;
	For lately we were bound, as you are now
	You are not Pinch's patient, are you, sir?

	Why look you strange on me? you know me well.

	I never saw you in my life till now.

	O, grief hath changed me since you saw me last,
	And careful hours with time's deformed hand
	Have written strange defeatures in my face:
	But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?

	Neither.

	Dromio, nor thou?

	                  No, trust me, sir, nor I.

	I am sure thou dost.

	Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not; and whatsoever a
	man denies, you are now bound to believe him.

	Not know my voice! O time's extremity,
	Hast thou so crack'd and splitted my poor tongue
	In seven short years, that here my only son
	Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares?
	Though now this grained face of mine be hid
	In sap-consuming winter's drizzled snow,
	And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
	Yet hath my night of life some memory,
	My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left,
	My dull deaf ears a little use to hear:
	All these old witnesses--I cannot err--
	Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.

	I never saw my father in my life.

	But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy,
	Thou know'st we parted: but perhaps, my son,
	Thou shamest to acknowledge me in misery.

	The duke and all that know me in the city
	Can witness with me that it is not so
	I ne'er saw Syracusa in my life.

	I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years
	Have I been patron to Antipholus,
	During which time he ne'er saw Syracusa:
	I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.

	Most mighty duke, behold a man much wrong'd.

	I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.

	One of these men is Genius to the other;
	And so of these. Which is the natural man,
	And which the spirit? who deciphers them?

	I, sir, am Dromio; command him away.

	I, sir, am Dromio; pray, let me stay.

	AEgeon art thou not? or else his ghost?

	O, my old master! who hath bound him here?

	Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds
	And gain a husband by his liberty.
	Speak, old AEgeon, if thou be'st the man
	That hadst a wife once call'd AEmilia
	That bore thee at a burden two fair sons:
	O, if thou be'st the same AEgeon, speak,
	And speak unto the same AEmilia!

	If I dream not, thou art AEmilia:
	If thou art she, tell me where is that son
	That floated with thee on the fatal raft?

	By men of Epidamnum he and I
	And the twin Dromio all were taken up;
	But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth
	By force took Dromio and my son from them
	And me they left with those of Epidamnum.
	What then became of them I cannot tell
	I to this fortune that you see me in.

	Why, here begins his morning story right;
	These two Antipholuses, these two so like,
	And these two Dromios, one in semblance,--
	Besides her urging of her wreck at sea,--
	These are the parents to these children,
	Which accidentally are met together.
	Antipholus, thou camest from Corinth first?

	No, sir, not I; I came from Syracuse.

	Stay, stand apart; I know not which is which.

	I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord,--

	And I with him.

	Brought to this town by that most famous warrior,
	Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.

	Which of you two did dine with me to-day?

	I, gentle mistress.

	And are not you my husband?

	No; I say nay to that.

	And so do I; yet did she call me so:
	And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here,
	Did call me brother.

		What I told you then,
	I hope I shall have leisure to make good;
	If this be not a dream I see and hear.

	That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.

	I think it be, sir; I deny it not.

	And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.

	I think I did, sir; I deny it not.

	I sent you money, sir, to be your bail,
	By Dromio; but I think he brought it not.

	No, none by me.

	This purse of ducats I received from you,
	And Dromio, my man, did bring them me.
	I see we still did meet each other's man,
	And I was ta'en for him, and he for me,
	And thereupon these errors are arose.

	These ducats pawn I for my father here.

	It shall not need; thy father hath his life.

	Sir, I must have that diamond from you.

	There, take it; and much thanks for my good cheer.

	Renowned duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
	To go with us into the abbey here
	And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes:
	And all that are assembled in this place,
	That by this sympathized one day's error
	Have suffer'd wrong, go keep us company,
	And we shall make full satisfaction.
	Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail
	Of you, my sons; and till this present hour
	My heavy burden ne'er delivered.
	The duke, my husband and my children both,
	And you the calendars of their nativity,
	Go to a gossips' feast and go with me;
	After so long grief, such festivity!

	With all my heart, I'll gossip at this feast.

	Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?

	Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embark'd?

	Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.

	He speaks to me. I am your master, Dromio:
	Come, go with us; we'll look to that anon:
	Embrace thy brother there; rejoice with him.

	There is a fat friend at your master's house,
	That kitchen'd me for you to-day at dinner:
	She now shall be my sister, not my wife.

	Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother:
	I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth.
	Will you walk in to see their gossiping?

	Not I, sir; you are my elder.

	That's a question: how shall we try it?

	We'll draw cuts for the senior: till then lead thou first.

	Nay, then, thus:
	We came into the world like brother and brother;
	And now let's go hand in hand, not one before another.



	Noble patricians, patrons of my right,
	Defend the justice of my cause with arms,
	And, countrymen, my loving followers,
	Plead my successive title with your swords:
	I am his first-born son, that was the last
	That wore the imperial diadem of Rome;
	Then let my father's honours live in me,
	Nor wrong mine age with this indignity.

	Romans, friends, followers, favorers of my right,
	If ever Bassianus, Caesar's son,
	Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,
	Keep then this passage to the Capitol
	And suffer not dishonour to approach
	The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate,
	To justice, continence and nobility;
	But let desert in pure election shine,
	And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice.

	Princes, that strive by factions and by friends
	Ambitiously for rule and empery,
	Know that the people of Rome, for whom we stand
	A special party, have, by common voice,
	In election for the Roman empery,
	Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius
	For many good and great deserts to Rome:
	A nobler man, a braver warrior,
	Lives not this day within the city walls:
	He by the senate is accit'd home
	From weary wars against the barbarous Goths;
	That, with his sons, a terror to our foes,
	Hath yoked a nation strong, train'd up in arms.
	Ten years are spent since first he undertook
	This cause of Rome and chastised with arms
	Our enemies' pride: five times he hath return'd
	Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons
	In coffins from the field;
	And now at last, laden with horror's spoils,
	Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
	Renowned Titus, flourishing in arms.
	Let us entreat, by honour of his name,
	Whom worthily you would have now succeed.
	And in the Capitol and senate's right,
	Whom you pretend to honour and adore,
	That you withdraw you and abate your strength;
	Dismiss your followers and, as suitors should,
	Plead your deserts in peace and humbleness.

	How fair the tribune speaks to calm my thoughts!

	Marcus Andronicus, so I do ally
	In thy uprightness and integrity,
	And so I love and honour thee and thine,
	Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,
	And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,
	Gracious Lavinia, Rome's rich ornament,
	That I will here dismiss my loving friends,
	And to my fortunes and the people's favor
	Commit my cause in balance to be weigh'd.

	Friends, that have been thus forward in my right,
	I thank you all and here dismiss you all,
	And to the love and favor of my country
	Commit myself, my person and the cause.

	Rome, be as just and gracious unto me
	As I am confident and kind to thee.
	Open the gates, and let me in.

	Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor.

	Romans, make way: the good Andronicus.
	Patron of virtue, Rome's best champion,
	Successful in the battles that he fights,
	With honour and with fortune is return'd
	From where he circumscribed with his sword,
	And brought to yoke, the enemies of Rome.

	Hail, Rome, victorious in thy mourning weeds!
	Lo, as the bark, that hath discharged her fraught,
	Returns with precious jading to the bay
	From whence at first she weigh'd her anchorage,
	Cometh Andronicus, bound with laurel boughs,
	To re-salute his country with his tears,
	Tears of true joy for his return to Rome.
	Thou great defender of this Capitol,
	Stand gracious to the rites that we intend!
	Romans, of five and twenty valiant sons,
	Half of the number that King Priam had,
	Behold the poor remains, alive and dead!
	These that survive let Rome reward with love;
	These that I bring unto their latest home,
	With burial amongst their ancestors:
	Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword.
	Titus, unkind and careless of thine own,
	Why suffer'st thou thy sons, unburied yet,
	To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?
	Make way to lay them by their brethren.

	There greet in silence, as the dead are wont,
	And sleep in peace, slain in your country's wars!
	O sacred receptacle of my joys,
	Sweet cell of virtue and nobility,
	How many sons of mine hast thou in store,
	That thou wilt never render to me more!

	Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
	That we may hew his limbs, and on a pile
	Ad manes fratrum sacrifice his flesh,
	Before this earthy prison of their bones;
	That so the shadows be not unappeased,
	Nor we disturb'd with prodigies on earth.

	I give him you, the noblest that survives,
	The eldest son of this distressed queen.

	Stay, Roman brethren! Gracious conqueror,
	Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,
	A mother's tears in passion for her son:
	And if thy sons were ever dear to thee,
	O, think my son to be as dear to me!
	Sufficeth not that we are brought to Rome,
	To beautify thy triumphs and return,
	Captive to thee and to thy Roman yoke,
	But must my sons be slaughter'd in the streets,
	For valiant doings in their country's cause?
	O, if to fight for king and commonweal
	Were piety in thine, it is in these.
	Andronicus, stain not thy tomb with blood:
	Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?
	Draw near them then in being merciful:
	Sweet mercy is nobility's true badge:
	Thrice noble Titus, spare my first-born son.

	Patient yourself, madam, and pardon me.
	These are their brethren, whom you Goths beheld
	Alive and dead, and for their brethren slain
	Religiously they ask a sacrifice:
	To this your son is mark'd, and die he must,
	To appease their groaning shadows that are gone.

	Away with him! and make a fire straight;
	And with our swords, upon a pile of wood,
	Let's hew his limbs till they be clean consumed.

	O cruel, irreligious piety!

	Was ever Scythia half so barbarous?

	Oppose not Scythia to ambitious Rome.
	Alarbus goes to rest; and we survive
	To tremble under Titus' threatening looks.
	Then, madam, stand resolved, but hope withal
	The self-same gods that arm'd the Queen of Troy
	With opportunity of sharp revenge
	Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent,
	May favor Tamora, the Queen of Goths--
	When Goths were Goths and Tamora was queen--
	To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.

	See, lord and father, how we have perform'd
	Our Roman rites: Alarbus' limbs are lopp'd,
	And entrails feed the sacrificing fire,
	Whose smoke, like incense, doth perfume the sky.
	Remaineth nought, but to inter our brethren,
	And with loud 'larums welcome them to Rome.

	Let it be so; and let Andronicus
	Make this his latest farewell to their souls.

	In peace and honour rest you here, my sons;
	Rome's readiest champions, repose you here in rest,
	Secure from worldly chances and mishaps!
	Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells,
	Here grow no damned grudges; here are no storms,
	No noise, but silence and eternal sleep:
	In peace and honour rest you here, my sons!

	In peace and honour live Lord Titus long;
	My noble lord and father, live in fame!
	Lo, at this tomb my tributary tears
	I render, for my brethren's obsequies;
	And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy,
	Shed on the earth, for thy return to Rome:
	O, bless me here with thy victorious hand,
	Whose fortunes Rome's best citizens applaud!

	Kind Rome, that hast thus lovingly reserved
	The cordial of mine age to glad my heart!
	Lavinia, live; outlive thy father's days,
	And fame's eternal date, for virtue's praise!

	Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother,
	Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome!

	Thanks, gentle tribune, noble brother Marcus.

	And welcome, nephews, from successful wars,
	You that survive, and you that sleep in fame!
	Fair lords, your fortunes are alike in all,
	That in your country's service drew your swords:
	But safer triumph is this funeral pomp,
	That hath aspired to Solon's happiness
	And triumphs over chance in honour's bed.
	Titus Andronicus, the people of Rome,
	Whose friend in justice thou hast ever been,
	Send thee by me, their tribune and their trust,
	This palliament of white and spotless hue;
	And name thee in election for the empire,
	With these our late-deceased emperor's sons:
	Be candidatus then, and put it on,
	And help to set a head on headless Rome.

	A better head her glorious body fits
	Than his that shakes for age and feebleness:
	What should I don this robe, and trouble you?
	Be chosen with proclamations to-day,
	To-morrow yield up rule, resign my life,
	And set abroad new business for you all?
	Rome, I have been thy soldier forty years,
	And led my country's strength successfully,
	And buried one and twenty valiant sons,
	Knighted in field, slain manfully in arms,
	In right and service of their noble country
	Give me a staff of honour for mine age,
	But not a sceptre to control the world:
	Upright he held it, lords, that held it last.

	Titus, thou shalt obtain and ask the empery.

	Proud and ambitious tribune, canst thou tell?

	Patience, Prince Saturninus.

	Romans, do me right:
	Patricians, draw your swords: and sheathe them not
	Till Saturninus be Rome's emperor.
	Andronicus, would thou wert shipp'd to hell,
	Rather than rob me of the people's hearts!

	Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good
	That noble-minded Titus means to thee!

	Content thee, prince; I will restore to thee
	The people's hearts, and wean them from themselves.

	Andronicus, I do not flatter thee,
	But honour thee, and will do till I die:
	My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends,
	I will most thankful be; and thanks to men
	Of noble minds is honourable meed.

	People of Rome, and people's tribunes here,
	I ask your voices and your suffrages:
	Will you bestow them friendly on Andronicus?

	To gratify the good Andronicus,
	And gratulate his safe return to Rome,
	The people will accept whom he admits.

	Tribunes, I thank you: and this suit I make,
	That you create your emperor's eldest son,
	Lord Saturnine; whose virtues will, I hope,
	Reflect on Rome as Titan's rays on earth,
	And ripen justice in this commonweal:
	Then, if you will elect by my advice,
	Crown him and say 'Long live our emperor!'

	With voices and applause of every sort,
	Patricians and plebeians, we create
	Lord Saturninus Rome's great emperor,
	And say 'Long live our Emperor Saturnine!'

	Titus Andronicus, for thy favors done
	To us in our election this day,
	I give thee thanks in part of thy deserts,
	And will with deeds requite thy gentleness:
	And, for an onset, Titus, to advance
	Thy name and honourable family,
	Lavinia will I make my empress,
	Rome's royal mistress, mistress of my heart,
	And in the sacred Pantheon her espouse:
	Tell me, Andronicus, doth this motion please thee?

	It doth, my worthy lord; and in this match
	I hold me highly honour'd of your grace:
	And here in sight of Rome to Saturnine,
	King and commander of our commonweal,
	The wide world's emperor, do I consecrate
	My sword, my chariot and my prisoners;
	Presents well worthy Rome's imperial lord:
	Receive them then, the tribute that I owe,
	Mine honour's ensigns humbled at thy feet.

	Thanks, noble Titus, father of my life!
	How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts
	Rome shall record, and when I do forget
	The least of these unspeakable deserts,
	Romans, forget your fealty to me.

	Now, madam, are you prisoner to
	an emperor;
	To him that, for your honour and your state,
	Will use you nobly and your followers.

	A goodly lady, trust me; of the hue
	That I would choose, were I to choose anew.
	Clear up, fair queen, that cloudy countenance:
	Though chance of war hath wrought this change of cheer,
	Thou comest not to be made a scorn in Rome:
	Princely shall be thy usage every way.
	Rest on my word, and let not discontent
	Daunt all your hopes: madam, he comforts you
	Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths.
	Lavinia, you are not displeased with this?

	Not I, my lord; sith true nobility
	Warrants these words in princely courtesy.

	Thanks, sweet Lavinia. Romans, let us go;
	Ransomless here we set our prisoners free:
	Proclaim our honours, lords, with trump and drum.

	Lord Titus, by your leave, this maid is mine.

	How, sir! are you in earnest then, my lord?

	Ay, noble Titus; and resolved withal
	To do myself this reason and this right.

	'Suum cuique' is our Roman justice:
	This prince in justice seizeth but his own.

	And that he will, and shall, if Lucius live.

	Traitors, avaunt! Where is the emperor's guard?
	Treason, my lord! Lavinia is surprised!

	Surprised! by whom?

	By him that justly may
	Bear his betroth'd from all the world away.

	Brothers, help to convey her hence away,
	And with my sword I'll keep this door safe.

	Follow, my lord, and I'll soon bring her back.

	My lord, you pass not here.


	What, villain boy!
	Barr'st me my way in Rome?

	Help, Lucius, help!

	My lord, you are unjust, and, more than so,
	In wrongful quarrel you have slain your son.

	Nor thou, nor he, are any sons of mine;
	My sons would never so dishonour me:
	Traitor, restore Lavinia to the emperor.

	Dead, if you will; but not to be his wife,
	That is another's lawful promised love.

	No, Titus, no; the emperor needs her not,
	Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock:
	I'll trust, by leisure, him that mocks me once;
	Thee never, nor thy traitorous haughty sons,
	Confederates all thus to dishonour me.
	Was there none else in Rome to make a stale,
	But Saturnine? Full well, Andronicus,
	Agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine,
	That said'st I begg'd the empire at thy hands.

	O monstrous! what reproachful words are these?

	But go thy ways; go, give that changing piece
	To him that flourish'd for her with his sword
	A valiant son-in-law thou shalt enjoy;
	One fit to bandy with thy lawless sons,
	To ruffle in the commonwealth of Rome.

	These words are razors to my wounded heart.

	And therefore, lovely Tamora, queen of Goths,
	That like the stately Phoebe 'mongst her nymphs
	Dost overshine the gallant'st dames of Rome,
	If thou be pleased with this my sudden choice,
	Behold, I choose thee, Tamora, for my bride,
	And will create thee empress of Rome,
	Speak, Queen of Goths, dost thou applaud my choice?
	And here I swear by all the Roman gods,
	Sith priest and holy water are so near
	And tapers burn so bright and every thing
	In readiness for Hymenaeus stand,
	I will not re-salute the streets of Rome,
	Or climb my palace, till from forth this place
	I lead espoused my bride along with me.

	And here, in sight of heaven, to Rome I swear,
	If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,
	She will a handmaid be to his desires,
	A loving nurse, a mother to his youth.

	Ascend, fair queen, Pantheon. Lords, accompany
	Your noble emperor and his lovely bride,
	Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine,
	Whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered:
	There shall we consummate our spousal rites.

	I am not bid to wait upon this bride.
	Titus, when wert thou wont to walk alone,
	Dishonour'd thus, and challenged of wrongs?

	O Titus, see, O, see what thou hast done!
	In a bad quarrel slain a virtuous son.

	No, foolish tribune, no; no son of mine,
	Nor thou, nor these, confederates in the deed
	That hath dishonour'd all our family;
	Unworthy brother, and unworthy sons!

	But let us give him burial, as becomes;
	Give Mutius burial with our brethren.

	Traitors, away! he rests not in this tomb:
	This monument five hundred years hath stood,
	Which I have sumptuously re-edified:
	Here none but soldiers and Rome's servitors
	Repose in fame; none basely slain in brawls:
	Bury him where you can; he comes not here.

	My lord, this is impiety in you:
	My nephew Mutius' deeds do plead for him
	He must be buried with his brethren.

	And shall, or him we will accompany.

	'And shall!' what villain was it that spake
	that word?

	He that would vouch it in any place but here.

	What, would you bury him in my despite?

	No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee
	To pardon Mutius and to bury him.

	Marcus, even thou hast struck upon my crest,
	And, with these boys, mine honour thou hast wounded:
	My foes I do repute you every one;
	So, trouble me no more, but get you gone.

	He is not with himself; let us withdraw.

	Not I, till Mutius' bones be buried.

	Brother, for in that name doth nature plead,--

	Father, and in that name doth nature speak,--

	Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.

	Renowned Titus, more than half my soul,--

	Dear father, soul and substance of us all,--

	Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter
	His noble nephew here in virtue's nest,
	That died in honour and Lavinia's cause.
	Thou art a Roman; be not barbarous:
	The Greeks upon advice did bury Ajax
	That slew himself; and wise Laertes' son
	Did graciously plead for his funerals:
	Let not young Mutius, then, that was thy joy
	Be barr'd his entrance here.


	Rise, Marcus, rise.
	The dismall'st day is this that e'er I saw,
	To be dishonour'd by my sons in Rome!
	Well, bury him, and bury me the next.

	There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy friends,
	Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb.

	No man shed tears for noble Mutius;
	He lives in fame that died in virtue's cause.

	My lord, to step out of these dreary dumps,
	How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths
	Is of a sudden thus advanced in Rome?

	I know not, Marcus; but I know it is,
	Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell:
	Is she not then beholding to the man
	That brought her for this high good turn so far?
	Yes, and will nobly him remunerate.

	So, Bassianus, you have play'd your prize:
	God give you joy, sir, of your gallant bride!

	And you of yours, my lord! I say no more,
	Nor wish no less; and so, I take my leave.

	Traitor, if Rome have law or we have power,
	Thou and thy faction shall repent this rape.

	Rape, call you it, my lord, to seize my own,
	My truth-betrothed love and now my wife?
	But let the laws of Rome determine all;
	Meanwhile I am possess'd of that is mine.

	'Tis good, sir: you are very short with us;
	But, if we live, we'll be as sharp with you.

	My lord, what I have done, as best I may,
	Answer I must and shall do with my life.
	Only thus much I give your grace to know:
	By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
	This noble gentleman, Lord Titus here,
	Is in opinion and in honour wrong'd;
	That in the rescue of Lavinia
	With his own hand did slay his youngest son,
	In zeal to you and highly moved to wrath
	To be controll'd in that he frankly gave:
	Receive him, then, to favor, Saturnine,
	That hath express'd himself in all his deeds
	A father and a friend to thee and Rome.

	Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds:
	'Tis thou and those that have dishonour'd me.
	Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge,
	How I have loved and honour'd Saturnine!

	My worthy lord, if ever Tamora
	Were gracious in those princely eyes of thine,
	Then hear me speak in indifferently for all;
	And at my suit, sweet, pardon what is past.

	What, madam! be dishonour'd openly,
	And basely put it up without revenge?

	Not so, my lord; the gods of Rome forfend
	I should be author to dishonour you!
	But on mine honour dare I undertake
	For good Lord Titus' innocence in all;
	Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs:
	Then, at my suit, look graciously on him;
	Lose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,
	Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart.
	My lord, be ruled by me,
	be won at last;
	Dissemble all your griefs and discontents:
	You are but newly planted in your throne;
	Lest, then, the people, and patricians too,
	Upon a just survey, take Titus' part,
	And so supplant you for ingratitude,
	Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin,
	Yield at entreats; and then let me alone:
	I'll find a day to massacre them all
	And raze their faction and their family,
	The cruel father and his traitorous sons,
	To whom I sued for my dear son's life,
	And make them know what 'tis to let a queen
	Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.

	Come, come, sweet emperor; come, Andronicus;
	Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart
	That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.

	Rise, Titus, rise; my empress hath prevail'd.

	I thank your majesty, and her, my lord:
	These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.

	Titus, I am incorporate in Rome,
	A Roman now adopted happily,
	And must advise the emperor for his good.
	This day all quarrels die, Andronicus;
	And let it be mine honour, good my lord,
	That I have reconciled your friends and you.
	For you, Prince Bassianus, I have pass'd
	My word and promise to the emperor,
	That you will be more mild and tractable.
	And fear not lords, and you, Lavinia;
	By my advice, all humbled on your knees,
	You shall ask pardon of his majesty.

	We do, and vow to heaven and to his highness,
	That what we did was mildly as we might,
	Tendering our sister's honour and our own.

	That, on mine honour, here I do protest.

	Away, and talk not; trouble us no more.

	Nay, nay, sweet emperor, we must all be friends:
	The tribune and his nephews kneel for grace;
	I will not be denied: sweet heart, look back.

	Marcus, for thy sake and thy brother's here,
	And at my lovely Tamora's entreats,
	I do remit these young men's heinous faults: Stand up.
	Lavinia, though you left me like a churl,
	I found a friend, and sure as death I swore
	I would not part a bachelor from the priest.
	Come, if the emperor's court can feast two brides,
	You are my guest, Lavinia, and your friends.
	This day shall be a love-day, Tamora.

	To-morrow, an it please your majesty
	To hunt the panther and the hart with me,
	With horn and hound we'll give your grace bonjour.

	Be it so, Titus, and gramercy too.

	Now climbeth Tamora Olympus' top,
	Safe out of fortune's shot; and sits aloft,
	Secure of thunder's crack or lightning flash;
	Advanced above pale envy's threatening reach.
	As when the golden sun salutes the morn,
	And, having gilt the ocean with his beams,
	Gallops the zodiac in his glistering coach,
	And overlooks the highest-peering hills;
	So Tamora:
	Upon her wit doth earthly honour wait,
	And virtue stoops and trembles at her frown.
	Then, Aaron, arm thy heart, and fit thy thoughts,
	To mount aloft with thy imperial mistress,
	And mount her pitch, whom thou in triumph long
	Hast prisoner held, fetter'd in amorous chains
	And faster bound to Aaron's charming eyes
	Than is Prometheus tied to Caucasus.
	Away with slavish weeds and servile thoughts!
	I will be bright, and shine in pearl and gold,
	To wait upon this new-made empress.
	To wait, said I? to wanton with this queen,
	This goddess, this Semiramis, this nymph,
	This siren, that will charm Rome's Saturnine,
	And see his shipwreck and his commonweal's.
	Holloa! what storm is this?

	Chiron, thy years want wit, thy wit wants edge,
	And manners, to intrude where I am graced;
	And may, for aught thou know'st, affected be.

	Demetrius, thou dost over-ween in all;
	And so in this, to bear me down with braves.
	'Tis not the difference of a year or two
	Makes me less gracious or thee more fortunate:
	I am as able and as fit as thou
	To serve, and to deserve my mistress' grace;
	And that my sword upon thee shall approve,
	And plead my passions for Lavinia's love.

	Clubs, clubs! these lovers will not keep
	the peace.

	Why, boy, although our mother, unadvised,
	Gave you a dancing-rapier by your side,
	Are you so desperate grown, to threat your friends?
	Go to; have your lath glued within your sheath
	Till you know better how to handle it.

	Meanwhile, sir, with the little skill I have,
	Full well shalt thou perceive how much I dare.

	Ay, boy, grow ye so brave?

	Why, how now, lords!
	So near the emperor's palace dare you draw,
	And maintain such a quarrel openly?
	Full well I wot the ground of all this grudge:
	I would not for a million of gold
	The cause were known to them it most concerns;
	Nor would your noble mother for much more
	Be so dishonour'd in the court of Rome.
	For shame, put up.

	                  Not I, till I have sheathed
	My rapier in his bosom and withal
	Thrust these reproachful speeches down his throat
	That he hath breathed in my dishonour here.

	For that I am prepared and full resolved.
	Foul-spoken coward, that thunder'st with thy tongue,
	And with thy weapon nothing darest perform!

	Away, I say!
	Now, by the gods that warlike Goths adore,
	This petty brabble will undo us all.
	Why, lords, and think you not how dangerous
	It is to jet upon a prince's right?
	What, is Lavinia then become so loose,
	Or Bassianus so degenerate,
	That for her love such quarrels may be broach'd
	Without controlment, justice, or revenge?
	Young lords, beware! and should the empress know
	This discord's ground, the music would not please.

	I care not, I, knew she and all the world:
	I love Lavinia more than all the world.

	Youngling, learn thou to make some meaner choice:
	Lavinia is thine elder brother's hope.

	Why, are ye mad? or know ye not, in Rome
	How furious and impatient they be,
	And cannot brook competitors in love?
	I tell you, lords, you do but plot your deaths
	By this device.

	                  Aaron, a thousand deaths
	Would I propose to achieve her whom I love.

	To achieve her! how?

	Why makest thou it so strange?
	She is a woman, therefore may be woo'd;
	She is a woman, therefore may be won;
	She is Lavinia, therefore must be loved.
	What, man! more water glideth by the mill
	Than wots the miller of; and easy it is
	Of a cut loaf to steal a shive, we know:
	Though Bassianus be the emperor's brother.
	Better than he have worn Vulcan's badge.

	Ay, and as good as Saturninus may.

	Then why should he despair that knows to court it
	With words, fair looks and liberality?
	What, hast not thou full often struck a doe,
	And borne her cleanly by the keeper's nose?

	Why, then, it seems, some certain snatch or so
	Would serve your turns.

	Ay, so the turn were served.

	Aaron, thou hast hit it.

	Would you had hit it too!
	Then should not we be tired with this ado.
	Why, hark ye, hark ye! and are you such fools
	To square for this? would it offend you, then
	That both should speed?

	Faith, not me.

	                  Nor me, so I were one.

	For shame, be friends, and join for that you jar:
	'Tis policy and stratagem must do
	That you affect; and so must you resolve,
	That what you cannot as you would achieve,
	You must perforce accomplish as you may.
	Take this of me: Lucrece was not more chaste
	Than this Lavinia, Bassianus' love.
	A speedier course than lingering languishment
	Must we pursue, and I have found the path.
	My lords, a solemn hunting is in hand;
	There will the lovely Roman ladies troop:
	The forest walks are wide and spacious;
	And many unfrequented plots there are
	Fitted by kind for rape and villany:
	Single you thither then this dainty doe,
	And strike her home by force, if not by words:
	This way, or not at all, stand you in hope.
	Come, come, our empress, with her sacred wit
	To villany and vengeance consecrate,
	Will we acquaint with all that we intend;
	And she shall file our engines with advice,
	That will not suffer you to square yourselves,
	But to your wishes' height advance you both.
	The emperor's court is like the house of Fame,
	The palace full of tongues, of eyes, and ears:
	The woods are ruthless, dreadful, deaf, and dull;
	There speak, and strike, brave boys, and take
	your turns;
	There serve your lusts, shadow'd from heaven's eye,
	And revel in Lavinia's treasury.

	Thy counsel, lad, smells of no cowardice,

	Sit fas aut nefas, till I find the stream
	To cool this heat, a charm to calm these fits.
	Per Styga, per manes vehor.

	The hunt is up, the morn is bright and grey,
	The fields are fragrant and the woods are green:
	Uncouple here and let us make a bay
	And wake the emperor and his lovely bride
	And rouse the prince and ring a hunter's peal,
	That all the court may echo with the noise.
	Sons, let it be your charge, as it is ours,
	To attend the emperor's person carefully:
	I have been troubled in my sleep this night,
	But dawning day new comfort hath inspired.

	Many good morrows to your majesty;
	Madam, to you as many and as good:
	I promised your grace a hunter's peal.

	And you have rung it lustily, my lord;
	Somewhat too early for new-married ladies.

	Lavinia, how say you?

	I say, no;
	I have been broad awake two hours and more.

	Come on, then; horse and chariots let us have,
	And to our sport.

	Madam, now shall ye see
	Our Roman hunting.

	                  I have dogs, my lord,
	Will rouse the proudest panther in the chase,
	And climb the highest promontory top.

	And I have horse will follow where the game
	Makes way, and run like swallows o'er the plain.

	Chiron, we hunt not, we, with horse nor hound,
	But hope to pluck a dainty doe to ground.

	He that had wit would think that I had none,
	To bury so much gold under a tree,
	And never after to inherit it.
	Let him that thinks of me so abjectly
	Know that this gold must coin a stratagem,
	Which, cunningly effected, will beget
	A very excellent piece of villany:
	And so repose, sweet gold, for their unrest

	That have their alms out of the empress' chest.

	My lovely Aaron, wherefore look'st thou sad,
	When every thing doth make a gleeful boast?
	The birds chant melody on every bush,
	The snake lies rolled in the cheerful sun,
	The green leaves quiver with the cooling wind
	And make a chequer'd shadow on the ground:
	Under their sweet shade, Aaron, let us sit,
	And, whilst the babbling echo mocks the hounds,
	Replying shrilly to the well-tuned horns,
	As if a double hunt were heard at once,
	Let us sit down and mark their yelping noise;
	And, after conflict such as was supposed
	The wandering prince and Dido once enjoy'd,
	When with a happy storm they were surprised
	And curtain'd with a counsel-keeping cave,
	We may, each wreathed in the other's arms,
	Our pastimes done, possess a golden slumber;
	Whiles hounds and horns and sweet melodious birds
	Be unto us as is a nurse's song
	Of lullaby to bring her babe asleep.

	Madam, though Venus govern your desires,
	Saturn is dominator over mine:
	What signifies my deadly-standing eye,
	My silence and my cloudy melancholy,
	My fleece of woolly hair that now uncurls
	Even as an adder when she doth unroll
	To do some fatal execution?
	No, madam, these are no venereal signs:
	Vengeance is in my heart, death in my hand,
	Blood and revenge are hammering in my head.
	Hark Tamora, the empress of my soul,
	Which never hopes more heaven than rests in thee,
	This is the day of doom for Bassianus:
	His Philomel must lose her tongue to-day,
	Thy sons make pillage of her chastity
	And wash their hands in Bassianus' blood.
	Seest thou this letter? take it up, I pray thee,
	And give the king this fatal plotted scroll.
	Now question me no more; we are espied;
	Here comes a parcel of our hopeful booty,
	Which dreads not yet their lives' destruction.

	Ah, my sweet Moor, sweeter to me than life!

	No more, great empress; Bassianus comes:
	Be cross with him; and I'll go fetch thy sons
	To back thy quarrels, whatsoe'er they be.

	Who have we here? Rome's royal empress,
	Unfurnish'd of her well-beseeming troop?
	Or is it Dian, habited like her,
	Who hath abandoned her holy groves
	To see the general hunting in this forest?

	Saucy controller of our private steps!
	Had I the power that some say Dian had,
	Thy temples should be planted presently
	With horns, as was Actaeon's; and the hounds
	Should drive upon thy new-transformed limbs,
	Unmannerly intruder as thou art!

	Under your patience, gentle empress,
	'Tis thought you have a goodly gift in horning;
	And to be doubted that your Moor and you
	Are singled forth to try experiments:
	Jove shield your husband from his hounds to-day!
	'Tis pity they should take him for a stag.

	Believe me, queen, your swarth Cimmerian
	Doth make your honour of his body's hue,
	Spotted, detested, and abominable.
	Why are you sequester'd from all your train,
	Dismounted from your snow-white goodly steed.
	And wander'd hither to an obscure plot,
	Accompanied but with a barbarous Moor,
	If foul desire had not conducted you?

	And, being intercepted in your sport,
	Great reason that my noble lord be rated
	For sauciness. I pray you, let us hence,
	And let her joy her raven-colour'd love;
	This valley fits the purpose passing well.

	The king my brother shall have note of this.

	Ay, for these slips have made him noted long:
	Good king, to be so mightily abused!

	Why have I patience to endure all this?

	How now, dear sovereign, and our gracious mother!
	Why doth your highness look so pale and wan?

	Have I not reason, think you, to look pale?
	These two have 'ticed me hither to this place:
	A barren detested vale, you see it is;
	The trees, though summer, yet forlorn and lean,
	O'ercome with moss and baleful mistletoe:
	Here never shines the sun; here nothing breeds,
	Unless the nightly owl or fatal raven:
	And when they show'd me this abhorred pit,
	They told me, here, at dead time of the night,
	A thousand fiends, a thousand hissing snakes,
	Ten thousand swelling toads, as many urchins,
	Would make such fearful and confused cries
	As any mortal body hearing it
	Should straight fall mad, or else die suddenly.
	No sooner had they told this hellish tale,
	But straight they told me they would bind me here
	Unto the body of a dismal yew,
	And leave me to this miserable death:
	And then they call'd me foul adulteress,
	Lascivious Goth, and all the bitterest terms
	That ever ear did hear to such effect:
	And, had you not by wondrous fortune come,
	This vengeance on me had they executed.
	Revenge it, as you love your mother's life,
	Or be ye not henceforth call'd my children.

	This is a witness that I am thy son.

	And this for me, struck home to show my strength.

	Ay, come, Semiramis, nay, barbarous Tamora,
	For no name fits thy nature but thy own!

	Give me thy poniard; you shall know, my boys
	Your mother's hand shall right your mother's wrong.

	Stay, madam; here is more belongs to her;
	First thrash the corn, then after burn the straw:
	This minion stood upon her chastity,
	Upon her nuptial vow, her loyalty,
	And with that painted hope braves your mightiness:
	And shall she carry this unto her grave?

	An if she do, I would I were an eunuch.
	Drag hence her husband to some secret hole,
	And make his dead trunk pillow to our lust.

	But when ye have the honey ye desire,
	Let not this wasp outlive, us both to sting.

	I warrant you, madam, we will make that sure.
	Come, mistress, now perforce we will enjoy
	That nice-preserved honesty of yours.

	O Tamora! thou bear'st a woman's face,--

	I will not hear her speak; away with her!

	Sweet lords, entreat her hear me but a word.

	Listen, fair madam: let it be your glory
	To see her tears; but be your heart to them
	As unrelenting flint to drops of rain.

	When did the tiger's young ones teach the dam?
	O, do not learn her wrath; she taught it thee;
	The milk thou suck'dst from her did turn to marble;
	Even at thy teat thou hadst thy tyranny.
	Yet every mother breeds not sons alike:

	Do thou entreat her show a woman pity.

	What, wouldst thou have me prove myself a bastard?

	'Tis true; the raven doth not hatch a lark:
	Yet have I heard,--O, could I find it now!--
	The lion moved with pity did endure
	To have his princely paws pared all away:
	Some say that ravens foster forlorn children,
	The whilst their own birds famish in their nests:
	O, be to me, though thy hard heart say no,
	Nothing so kind, but something pitiful!

	I know not what it means; away with her!

	O, let me teach thee! for my father's sake,
	That gave thee life, when well he might have
	slain thee,
	Be not obdurate, open thy deaf ears.

	Hadst thou in person ne'er offended me,
	Even for his sake am I pitiless.
	Remember, boys, I pour'd forth tears in vain,
	To save your brother from the sacrifice;
	But fierce Andronicus would not relent;
	Therefore, away with her, and use her as you will,
	The worse to her, the better loved of me.

	O Tamora, be call'd a gentle queen,
	And with thine own hands kill me in this place!
	For 'tis not life that I have begg'd so long;
	Poor I was slain when Bassianus died.

	What begg'st thou, then? fond woman, let me go.

	'Tis present death I beg; and one thing more
	That womanhood denies my tongue to tell:
	O, keep me from their worse than killing lust,
	And tumble me into some loathsome pit,
	Where never man's eye may behold my body:
	Do this, and be a charitable murderer.

	So should I rob my sweet sons of their fee:
	No, let them satisfy their lust on thee.

	Away! for thou hast stay'd us here too long.

	No grace? no womanhood? Ah, beastly creature!
	The blot and enemy to our general name!
	Confusion fall--

	Nay, then I'll stop your mouth. Bring thou her husband:
	This is the hole where Aaron bid us hide him.

	Farewell, my sons: see that you make her sure.
	Ne'er let my heart know merry cheer indeed,
	Till all the Andronici be made away.
	Now will I hence to seek my lovely Moor,
	And let my spleenful sons this trull deflow'r.

	Come on, my lords, the better foot before:
	Straight will I bring you to the loathsome pit
	Where I espied the panther fast asleep.

	My sight is very dull, whate'er it bodes.

	And mine, I promise you; were't not for shame,
	Well could I leave our sport to sleep awhile.

	What art thou fall'n? What subtle hole is this,
	Whose mouth is cover'd with rude-growing briers,
	Upon whose leaves are drops of new-shed blood
	As fresh as morning dew distill'd on flowers?
	A very fatal place it seems to me.

	Speak, brother, hast thou hurt thee with the fall?

	O brother, with the dismall'st object hurt
	That ever eye with sight made heart lament!

	Now will I fetch the king to find them here,
	That he thereby may give a likely guess
	How these were they that made away his brother.

	Why dost not comfort me, and help me out
	From this unhallowed and blood-stained hole?

	I am surprised with an uncouth fear;
	A chilling sweat o'er-runs my trembling joints:
	My heart suspects more than mine eye can see.

	To prove thou hast a true-divining heart,
	Aaron and thou look down into this den,
	And see a fearful sight of blood and death.

	Aaron is gone; and my compassionate heart
	Will not permit mine eyes once to behold
	The thing whereat it trembles by surmise;
	O, tell me how it is; for ne'er till now
	Was I a child to fear I know not what.

	Lord Bassianus lies embrewed here,
	All on a heap, like to a slaughter'd lamb,
	In this detested, dark, blood-drinking pit.

	If it be dark, how dost thou know 'tis he?

	Upon his bloody finger he doth wear
	A precious ring, that lightens all the hole,
	Which, like a taper in some monument,
	Doth shine upon the dead man's earthy cheeks,
	And shows the ragged entrails of the pit:
	So pale did shine the moon on Pyramus
	When he by night lay bathed in maiden blood.
	O brother, help me with thy fainting hand--
	If fear hath made thee faint, as me it hath--
	Out of this fell devouring receptacle,
	As hateful as Cocytus' misty mouth.

	Reach me thy hand, that I may help thee out;
	Or, wanting strength to do thee so much good,
	I may be pluck'd into the swallowing womb
	Of this deep pit, poor Bassianus' grave.
	I have no strength to pluck thee to the brink.

	Nor I no strength to climb without thy help.

	Thy hand once more; I will not loose again,
	Till thou art here aloft, or I below:
	Thou canst not come to me: I come to thee.

	Along with me: I'll see what hole is here,
	And what he is that now is leap'd into it.
	Say who art thou that lately didst descend
	Into this gaping hollow of the earth?

	The unhappy son of old Andronicus:
	Brought hither in a most unlucky hour,
	To find thy brother Bassianus dead.

	My brother dead! I know thou dost but jest:
	He and his lady both are at the lodge
	Upon the north side of this pleasant chase;
	'Tis not an hour since I left him there.

	We know not where you left him all alive;
	But, out, alas! here have we found him dead.

	Where is my lord the king?

	Here, Tamora, though grieved with killing grief.

	Where is thy brother Bassianus?

	Now to the bottom dost thou search my wound:
	Poor Bassianus here lies murdered.

	Then all too late I bring this fatal writ,
	The complot of this timeless tragedy;
	And wonder greatly that man's face can fold
	In pleasing smiles such murderous tyranny.

	'An if we miss to meet him handsomely--
	Sweet huntsman, Bassianus 'tis we mean--
	Do thou so much as dig the grave for him:
	Thou know'st our meaning. Look for thy reward
	Among the nettles at the elder-tree
	Which overshades the mouth of that same pit
	Where we decreed to bury Bassianus.
	Do this, and purchase us thy lasting friends.'
	O Tamora! was ever heard the like?
	This is the pit, and this the elder-tree.
	Look, sirs, if you can find the huntsman out
	That should have murdered Bassianus here.

	My gracious lord, here is the bag of gold.

	Two of thy whelps, fell curs of
	bloody kind,
	Have here bereft my brother of his life.
	Sirs, drag them from the pit unto the prison:
	There let them bide until we have devised
	Some never-heard-of torturing pain for them.

	What, are they in this pit? O wondrous thing!
	How easily murder is discovered!

	High emperor, upon my feeble knee
	I beg this boon, with tears not lightly shed,
	That this fell fault of my accursed sons,
	Accursed if the fault be proved in them,--

	If it be proved! you see it is apparent.
	Who found this letter? Tamora, was it you?

	Andronicus himself did take it up.

	I did, my lord: yet let me be their bail;
	For, by my father's reverend tomb, I vow
	They shall be ready at your highness' will
	To answer their suspicion with their lives.

	Thou shalt not bail them: see thou follow me.
	Some bring the murder'd body, some the murderers:
	Let them not speak a word; the guilt is plain;
	For, by my soul, were there worse end than death,
	That end upon them should be executed.

	Andronicus, I will entreat the king;
	Fear not thy sons; they shall do well enough.

	Come, Lucius, come; stay not to talk with them.

	So, now go tell, an if thy tongue can speak,
	Who 'twas that cut thy tongue and ravish'd thee.

	Write down thy mind, bewray thy meaning so,
	An if thy stumps will let thee play the scribe.

	See, how with signs and tokens she can scrowl.

	Go home, call for sweet water, wash thy hands.

	She hath no tongue to call, nor hands to wash;
	And so let's leave her to her silent walks.

	An 'twere my case, I should go hang myself.

	If thou hadst hands to help thee knit the cord.

	Who is this? my niece, that flies away so fast!
	Cousin, a word; where is your husband?
	If I do dream, would all my wealth would wake me!
	If I do wake, some planet strike me down,
	That I may slumber in eternal sleep!
	Speak, gentle niece, what stern ungentle hands
	Have lopp'd and hew'd and made thy body bare
	Of her two branches, those sweet ornaments,
	Whose circling shadows kings have sought to sleep in,
	And might not gain so great a happiness
	As have thy love? Why dost not speak to me?
	Alas, a crimson river of warm blood,
	Like to a bubbling fountain stirr'd with wind,
	Doth rise and fall between thy rosed lips,
	Coming and going with thy honey breath.
	But, sure, some Tereus hath deflowered thee,
	And, lest thou shouldst detect him, cut thy tongue.
	Ah, now thou turn'st away thy face for shame!
	And, notwithstanding all this loss of blood,
	As from a conduit with three issuing spouts,
	Yet do thy cheeks look red as Titan's face
	Blushing to be encountered with a cloud.
	Shall I speak for thee? shall I say 'tis so?
	O, that I knew thy heart; and knew the beast,
	That I might rail at him, to ease my mind!
	Sorrow concealed, like an oven stopp'd,
	Doth burn the heart to cinders where it is.
	Fair Philomela, she but lost her tongue,
	And in a tedious sampler sew'd her mind:
	But, lovely niece, that mean is cut from thee;
	A craftier Tereus, cousin, hast thou met,
	And he hath cut those pretty fingers off,
	That could have better sew'd than Philomel.
	O, had the monster seen those lily hands
	Tremble, like aspen-leaves, upon a lute,
	And make the silken strings delight to kiss them,
	He would not then have touch'd them for his life!
	Or, had he heard the heavenly harmony
	Which that sweet tongue hath made,
	He would have dropp'd his knife, and fell asleep
	As Cerberus at the Thracian poet's feet.
	Come, let us go, and make thy father blind;
	For such a sight will blind a father's eye:
	One hour's storm will drown the fragrant meads;
	What will whole months of tears thy father's eyes?
	Do not draw back, for we will mourn with thee
	O, could our mourning ease thy misery!

	Hear me, grave fathers! noble tribunes, stay!
	For pity of mine age, whose youth was spent
	In dangerous wars, whilst you securely slept;
	For all my blood in Rome's great quarrel shed;
	For all the frosty nights that I have watch'd;
	And for these bitter tears, which now you see
	Filling the aged wrinkles in my cheeks;
	Be pitiful to my condemned sons,
	Whose souls are not corrupted as 'tis thought.
	For two and twenty sons I never wept,
	Because they died in honour's lofty bed.

	For these, these, tribunes, in the dust I write
	My heart's deep languor and my soul's sad tears:
	Let my tears stanch the earth's dry appetite;
	My sons' sweet blood will make it shame and blush.
	O earth, I will befriend thee more with rain,
	That shall distil from these two ancient urns,
	Than youthful April shall with all his showers:
	In summer's drought I'll drop upon thee still;
	In winter with warm tears I'll melt the snow
	And keep eternal spring-time on thy face,
	So thou refuse to drink my dear sons' blood.

	O reverend tribunes! O gentle, aged men!
	Unbind my sons, reverse the doom of death;
	And let me say, that never wept before,
	My tears are now prevailing orators.

	O noble father, you lament in vain:
	The tribunes hear you not; no man is by;
	And you recount your sorrows to a stone.

	Ah, Lucius, for thy brothers let me plead.
	Grave tribunes, once more I entreat of you,--

	My gracious lord, no tribune hears you speak.

	Why, tis no matter, man; if they did hear,
	They would not mark me, or if they did mark,
	They would not pity me, yet plead I must;
	And bootless unto them [                  ]
	Therefore I tell my sorrows to the stones;
	Who, though they cannot answer my distress,
	Yet in some sort they are better than the tribunes,
	For that they will not intercept my tale:
	When I do weep, they humbly at my feet
	Receive my tears and seem to weep with me;
	And, were they but attired in grave weeds,
	Rome could afford no tribune like to these.
	A stone is soft as wax,--tribunes more hard than stones;
	A stone is silent, and offendeth not,
	And tribunes with their tongues doom men to death.

	But wherefore stand'st thou with thy weapon drawn?

	To rescue my two brothers from their death:
	For which attempt the judges have pronounced
	My everlasting doom of banishment.

	O happy man! they have befriended thee.
	Why, foolish Lucius, dost thou not perceive
	That Rome is but a wilderness of tigers?
	Tigers must prey, and Rome affords no prey
	But me and mine: how happy art thou, then,
	From these devourers to be banished!
	But who comes with our brother Marcus here?

	Titus, prepare thy aged eyes to weep;
	Or, if not so, thy noble heart to break:
	I bring consuming sorrow to thine age.

	Will it consume me? let me see it, then.

	This was thy daughter.

	Why, Marcus, so she is.

	Ay me, this object kills me!

	Faint-hearted boy, arise, and look upon her.
	Speak, Lavinia, what accursed hand
	Hath made thee handless in thy father's sight?
	What fool hath added water to the sea,
	Or brought a faggot to bright-burning Troy?
	My grief was at the height before thou camest,
	And now like Nilus, it disdaineth bounds.
	Give me a sword, I'll chop off my hands too;
	For they have fought for Rome, and all in vain;
	And they have nursed this woe, in feeding life;
	In bootless prayer have they been held up,
	And they have served me to effectless use:
	Now all the service I require of them
	Is that the one will help to cut the other.
	'Tis well, Lavinia, that thou hast no hands;
	For hands, to do Rome service, are but vain.

	Speak, gentle sister, who hath martyr'd thee?

	O, that delightful engine of her thoughts
	That blabb'd them with such pleasing eloquence,
	Is torn from forth that pretty hollow cage,
	Where, like a sweet melodious bird, it sung
	Sweet varied notes, enchanting every ear!

	O, say thou for her, who hath done this deed?

	O, thus I found her, straying in the park,
	Seeking to hide herself, as doth the deer
	That hath received some unrecuring wound.

	It was my deer; and he that wounded her
	Hath hurt me more than had he killed me dead:
	For now I stand as one upon a rock
	Environed with a wilderness of sea,
	Who marks the waxing tide grow wave by wave,
	Expecting ever when some envious surge
	Will in his brinish bowels swallow him.
	This way to death my wretched sons are gone;
	Here stands my other son, a banished man,
	And here my brother, weeping at my woes.
	But that which gives my soul the greatest spurn,
	Is dear Lavinia, dearer than my soul.
	Had I but seen thy picture in this plight,
	It would have madded me: what shall I do
	Now I behold thy lively body so?
	Thou hast no hands, to wipe away thy tears:
	Nor tongue, to tell me who hath martyr'd thee:
	Thy husband he is dead: and for his death
	Thy brothers are condemn'd, and dead by this.
	Look, Marcus! ah, son Lucius, look on her!
	When I did name her brothers, then fresh tears
	Stood on her cheeks, as doth the honey-dew
	Upon a gather'd lily almost wither'd.

	Perchance she weeps because they kill'd her husband;
	Perchance because she knows them innocent.

	If they did kill thy husband, then be joyful
	Because the law hath ta'en revenge on them.
	No, no, they would not do so foul a deed;
	Witness the sorrow that their sister makes.
	Gentle Lavinia, let me kiss thy lips.
	Or make some sign how I may do thee ease:
	Shall thy good uncle, and thy brother Lucius,
	And thou, and I, sit round about some fountain,
	Looking all downwards to behold our cheeks
	How they are stain'd, as meadows, yet not dry,
	With miry slime left on them by a flood?
	And in the fountain shall we gaze so long
	Till the fresh taste be taken from that clearness,
	And made a brine-pit with our bitter tears?
	Or shall we cut away our hands, like thine?
	Or shall we bite our tongues, and in dumb shows
	Pass the remainder of our hateful days?
	What shall we do? let us, that have our tongues,
	Plot some deuce of further misery,
	To make us wonder'd at in time to come.

	Sweet father, cease your tears; for, at your grief,
	See how my wretched sister sobs and weeps.

	Patience, dear niece. Good Titus, dry thine eyes.

	Ah, Marcus, Marcus! brother, well I wot
	Thy napkin cannot drink a tear of mine,
	For thou, poor man, hast drown'd it with thine own.

	Ah, my Lavinia, I will wipe thy cheeks.

	Mark, Marcus, mark! I understand her signs:
	Had she a tongue to speak, now would she say
	That to her brother which I said to thee:
	His napkin, with his true tears all bewet,
	Can do no service on her sorrowful cheeks.
	O, what a sympathy of woe is this,
	As far from help as Limbo is from bliss!

	Titus Andronicus, my lord the emperor
	Sends thee this word,--that, if thou love thy sons,
	Let Marcus, Lucius, or thyself, old Titus,
	Or any one of you, chop off your hand,
	And send it to the king: he for the same
	Will send thee hither both thy sons alive;
	And that shall be the ransom for their fault.

	O gracious emperor! O gentle Aaron!
	Did ever raven sing so like a lark,
	That gives sweet tidings of the sun's uprise?
	With all my heart, I'll send the emperor My hand:
	Good Aaron, wilt thou help to chop it off?

	Stay, father! for that noble hand of thine,
	That hath thrown down so many enemies,
	Shall not be sent: my hand will serve the turn:
	My youth can better spare my blood than you;
	And therefore mine shall save my brothers' lives.

	 Which of your hands hath not defended Rome,
	And rear'd aloft the bloody battle-axe,
	Writing destruction on the enemy's castle?
	O, none of both but are of high desert:
	My hand hath been but idle; let it serve
	To ransom my two nephews from their death;
	Then have I kept it to a worthy end.

	Nay, come, agree whose hand shall go along,
	For fear they die before their pardon come.

	My hand shall go.

	                  By heaven, it shall not go!

	Sirs, strive no more: such wither'd herbs as these
	Are meet for plucking up, and therefore mine.

	Sweet father, if I shall be thought thy son,
	Let me redeem my brothers both from death.

	And, for our father's sake and mother's care,
	Now let me show a brother's love to thee.

	Agree between you; I will spare my hand.

	Then I'll go fetch an axe.

	But I will use the axe.

	Come hither, Aaron; I'll deceive them both:
	Lend me thy hand, and I will give thee mine.

	If that be call'd deceit, I will be honest,
	And never, whilst I live, deceive men so:
	But I'll deceive you in another sort,
	And that you'll say, ere half an hour pass.

	Now stay your strife: what shall be is dispatch'd.
	Good Aaron, give his majesty my hand:
	Tell him it was a hand that warded him
	From thousand dangers; bid him bury it
	More hath it merited; that let it have.
	As for my sons, say I account of them
	As jewels purchased at an easy price;
	And yet dear too, because I bought mine own.

	I go, Andronicus: and for thy hand
	Look by and by to have thy sons with thee.

	Their heads, I mean. O, how this villany
	Doth fat me with the very thoughts of it!
	Let fools do good, and fair men call for grace.
	Aaron will have his soul black like his face.

	O, here I lift this one hand up to heaven,
	And bow this feeble ruin to the earth:
	If any power pities wretched tears,
	To that I call!

	What, wilt thou kneel with me?
	Do, then, dear heart; for heaven shall hear our prayers;
	Or with our sighs we'll breathe the welkin dim,
	And stain the sun with fog, as sometime clouds
	When they do hug him in their melting bosoms.

	O brother, speak with possibilities,
	And do not break into these deep extremes.

	Is not my sorrow deep, having no bottom?
	Then be my passions bottomless with them.

	But yet let reason govern thy lament.

	If there were reason for these miseries,
	Then into limits could I bind my woes:
	When heaven doth weep, doth not the earth o'erflow?
	If the winds rage, doth not the sea wax mad,
	Threatening the welkin with his big-swoln face?
	And wilt thou have a reason for this coil?
	I am the sea; hark, how her sighs do blow!
	She is the weeping welkin, I the earth:
	Then must my sea be moved with her sighs;
	Then must my earth with her continual tears
	Become a deluge, overflow'd and drown'd;
	For why my bowels cannot hide her woes,
	But like a drunkard must I vomit them.
	Then give me leave, for losers will have leave
	To ease their stomachs with their bitter tongues.

	Worthy Andronicus, ill art thou repaid
	For that good hand thou sent'st the emperor.
	Here are the heads of thy two noble sons;
	And here's thy hand, in scorn to thee sent back;
	Thy griefs their sports, thy resolution mock'd;
	That woe is me to think upon thy woes
	More than remembrance of my father's death.

	Now let hot AEtna cool in Sicily,
	And be my heart an ever-burning hell!
	These miseries are more than may be borne.
	To weep with them that weep doth ease some deal;
	But sorrow flouted at is double death.

	Ah, that this sight should make so deep a wound,
	And yet detested life not shrink thereat!
	That ever death should let life bear his name,
	Where life hath no more interest but to breathe!

	Alas, poor heart, that kiss is comfortless
	As frozen water to a starved snake.

	When will this fearful slumber have an end?

	Now, farewell, flattery: die, Andronicus;
	Thou dost not slumber: see, thy two sons' heads,
	Thy warlike hand, thy mangled daughter here:
	Thy other banish'd son, with this dear sight
	Struck pale and bloodless; and thy brother, I,
	Even like a stony image, cold and numb.
	Ah, now no more will I control thy griefs:
	Rend off thy silver hair, thy other hand
	Gnawing with thy teeth; and be this dismal sight
	The closing up of our most wretched eyes;
	Now is a time to storm; why art thou still?

	Ha, ha, ha!

	Why dost thou laugh? it fits not with this hour.

	Why, I have not another tear to shed:
	Besides, this sorrow is an enemy,
	And would usurp upon my watery eyes
	And make them blind with tributary tears:
	Then which way shall I find Revenge's cave?
	For these two heads do seem to speak to me,
	And threat me I shall never come to bliss
	Till all these mischiefs be return'd again
	Even in their throats that have committed them.
	Come, let me see what task I have to do.
	You heavy people, circle me about,
	That I may turn me to each one of you,
	And swear unto my soul to right your wrongs.
	The vow is made. Come, brother, take a head;
	And in this hand the other I will bear.
	Lavinia, thou shalt be employ'd: these arms!
	Bear thou my hand, sweet wench, between thy teeth.
	As for thee, boy, go get thee from my sight;
	Thou art an exile, and thou must not stay:
	Hie to the Goths, and raise an army there:
	And, if you love me, as I think you do,
	Let's kiss and part, for we have much to do.

	Farewell Andronicus, my noble father,
	The wofull'st man that ever lived in Rome:
	Farewell, proud Rome; till Lucius come again,
	He leaves his pledges dearer than his life:
	Farewell, Lavinia, my noble sister;
	O, would thou wert as thou tofore hast been!
	But now nor Lucius nor Lavinia lives
	But in oblivion and hateful griefs.
	If Lucius live, he will requite your wrongs;
	And make proud Saturnine and his empress
	Beg at the gates, like Tarquin and his queen.
	Now will I to the Goths, and raise a power,
	To be revenged on Rome and Saturnine.

	So, so; now sit: and look you eat no more
	Than will preserve just so much strength in us
	As will revenge these bitter woes of ours.
	Marcus, unknit that sorrow-wreathen knot:
	Thy niece and I, poor creatures, want our hands,
	And cannot passionate our tenfold grief
	With folded arms. This poor right hand of mine
	Is left to tyrannize upon my breast;
	Who, when my heart, all mad with misery,
	Beats in this hollow prison of my flesh,
	Then thus I thump it down.

	Thou map of woe, that thus dost talk in signs!
	When thy poor heart beats with outrageous beating,
	Thou canst not strike it thus to make it still.
	Wound it with sighing, girl, kill it with groans;
	Or get some little knife between thy teeth,
	And just against thy heart make thou a hole;
	That all the tears that thy poor eyes let fall
	May run into that sink, and soaking in
	Drown the lamenting fool in sea-salt tears.

	Fie, brother, fie! teach her not thus to lay
	Such violent hands upon her tender life.

	How now! has sorrow made thee dote already?
	Why, Marcus, no man should be mad but I.
	What violent hands can she lay on her life?
	Ah, wherefore dost thou urge the name of hands;
	To bid AEneas tell the tale twice o'er,
	How Troy was burnt and he made miserable?
	O, handle not the theme, to talk of hands,
	Lest we remember still that we have none.
	Fie, fie, how franticly I square my talk,
	As if we should forget we had no hands,
	If Marcus did not name the word of hands!
	Come, let's fall to; and, gentle girl, eat this:
	Here is no drink! Hark, Marcus, what she says;
	I can interpret all her martyr'd signs;
	She says she drinks no other drink but tears,
	Brew'd with her sorrow, mesh'd upon her cheeks:
	Speechless complainer, I will learn thy thought;
	In thy dumb action will I be as perfect
	As begging hermits in their holy prayers:
	Thou shalt not sigh, nor hold thy stumps to heaven,
	Nor wink, nor nod, nor kneel, nor make a sign,
	But I of these will wrest an alphabet
	And by still practise learn to know thy meaning.

	Good grandsire, leave these bitter deep laments:
	Make my aunt merry with some pleasing tale.

	Alas, the tender boy, in passion moved,
	Doth weep to see his grandsire's heaviness.

	Peace, tender sapling; thou art made of tears,
	And tears will quickly melt thy life away.

	What dost thou strike at, Marcus, with thy knife?

	At that that I have kill'd, my lord; a fly.

	Out on thee, murderer! thou kill'st my heart;
	Mine eyes are cloy'd with view of tyranny:
	A deed of death done on the innocent
	Becomes not Titus' brother: get thee gone:
	I see thou art not for my company.

	Alas, my lord, I have but kill'd a fly.

	But how, if that fly had a father and mother?
	How would he hang his slender gilded wings,
	And buzz lamenting doings in the air!
	Poor harmless fly,
	That, with his pretty buzzing melody,
	Came here to make us merry! and thou hast
	kill'd him.

	Pardon me, sir; it was a black ill-favor'd fly,
	Like to the empress' Moor; therefore I kill'd him.

	O, O, O,
	Then pardon me for reprehending thee,
	For thou hast done a charitable deed.
	Give me thy knife, I will insult on him;
	Flattering myself, as if it were the Moor
	Come hither purposely to poison me.--
	There's for thyself, and that's for Tamora.
	Ah, sirrah!
	Yet, I think, we are not brought so low,
	But that between us we can kill a fly
	That comes in likeness of a coal-black Moor.

	Alas, poor man! grief has so wrought on him,
	He takes false shadows for true substances.

	Come, take away. Lavinia, go with me:
	I'll to thy closet; and go read with thee
	Sad stories chanced in the times of old.
	Come, boy, and go with me: thy sight is young,
	And thou shalt read when mine begin to dazzle.

	Help, grandsire, help! my aunt Lavinia
	Follows me every where, I know not why:
	Good uncle Marcus, see how swift she comes.
	Alas, sweet aunt, I know not what you mean.

	Stand by me, Lucius; do not fear thine aunt.

	She loves thee, boy, too well to do thee harm.

	Ay, when my father was in Rome she did.

	What means my niece Lavinia by these signs?

	Fear her not, Lucius: somewhat doth she mean:
	See, Lucius, see how much she makes of thee:
	Somewhither would she have thee go with her.
	Ah, boy, Cornelia never with more care
	Read to her sons than she hath read to thee
	Sweet poetry and Tully's Orator.

	Canst thou not guess wherefore she plies thee thus?

	My lord, I know not, I, nor can I guess,
	Unless some fit or frenzy do possess her:
	For I have heard my grandsire say full oft,
	Extremity of griefs would make men mad;
	And I have read that Hecuba of Troy
	Ran mad through sorrow: that made me to fear;
	Although, my lord, I know my noble aunt
	Loves me as dear as e'er my mother did,
	And would not, but in fury, fright my youth:
	Which made me down to throw my books, and fly--
	Causeless, perhaps. But pardon me, sweet aunt:
	And, madam, if my uncle Marcus go,
	I will most willingly attend your ladyship.

	Lucius, I will.

	How now, Lavinia! Marcus, what means this?
	Some book there is that she desires to see.
	Which is it, girl, of these? Open them, boy.
	But thou art deeper read, and better skill'd
	Come, and take choice of all my library,
	And so beguile thy sorrow, till the heavens
	Reveal the damn'd contriver of this deed.
	Why lifts she up her arms in sequence thus?

	I think she means that there was more than one
	Confederate in the fact: ay, more there was;
	Or else to heaven she heaves them for revenge.

	Lucius, what book is that she tosseth so?

	Grandsire, 'tis Ovid's Metamorphoses;
	My mother gave it me.

	For love of her that's gone,
	Perhaps she cull'd it from among the rest.

	Soft! see how busily she turns the leaves!

	What would she find? Lavinia, shall I read?
	This is the tragic tale of Philomel,
	And treats of Tereus' treason and his rape:
	And rape, I fear, was root of thine annoy.

	See, brother, see; note how she quotes the leaves.

	Lavinia, wert thou thus surprised, sweet girl,
	Ravish'd and wrong'd, as Philomela was,
	Forced in the ruthless, vast, and gloomy woods? See, see!
	Ay, such a place there is, where we did hunt--
	O, had we never, never hunted there!--
	Pattern'd by that the poet here describes,
	By nature made for murders and for rapes.

	O, why should nature build so foul a den,
	Unless the gods delight in tragedies?

	Give signs, sweet girl, for here are none
	but friends,
	What Roman lord it was durst do the deed:
	Or slunk not Saturnine, as Tarquin erst,
	That left the camp to sin in Lucrece' bed?

	Sit down, sweet niece: brother, sit down by me.
	Apollo, Pallas, Jove, or Mercury,
	Inspire me, that I may this treason find!
	My lord, look here: look here, Lavinia:
	This sandy plot is plain; guide, if thou canst
	This after me, when I have writ my name
	Without the help of any hand at all.

	Cursed be that heart that forced us to this shift!
	Write thou good niece; and here display, at last,
	What God will have discover'd for revenge;
	Heaven guide thy pen to print thy sorrows plain,
	That we may know the traitors and the truth!

	O, do ye read, my lord, what she hath writ?
	'Stuprum. Chiron. Demetrius.'

	What, what! the lustful sons of Tamora
	Performers of this heinous, bloody deed?

	Magni Dominator poli,
	Tam lentus audis scelera? tam lentus vides?

	O, calm thee, gentle lord; although I know
	There is enough written upon this earth
	To stir a mutiny in the mildest thoughts
	And arm the minds of infants to exclaims.
	My lord, kneel down with me; Lavinia, kneel;
	And kneel, sweet boy, the Roman Hector's hope;
	And swear with me, as, with the woful fere
	And father of that chaste dishonour'd dame,
	Lord Junius Brutus sware for Lucrece' rape,
	That we will prosecute by good advice
	Mortal revenge upon these traitorous Goths,
	And see their blood, or die with this reproach.

	'Tis sure enough, an you knew how.
	But if you hunt these bear-whelps, then beware:
	The dam will wake; and, if she wind you once,
	She's with the lion deeply still in league,
	And lulls him whilst she playeth on her back,
	And when he sleeps will she do what she list.
	You are a young huntsman, Marcus; let it alone;
	And, come, I will go get a leaf of brass,
	And with a gad of steel will write these words,
	And lay it by: the angry northern wind
	Will blow these sands, like Sibyl's leaves, abroad,
	And where's your lesson, then? Boy, what say you?

	I say, my lord, that if I were a man,
	Their mother's bed-chamber should not be safe
	For these bad bondmen to the yoke of Rome.

	Ay, that's my boy! thy father hath full oft
	For his ungrateful country done the like.

	And, uncle, so will I, an if I live.

	Come, go with me into mine armoury;
	Lucius, I'll fit thee; and withal, my boy,
	Shalt carry from me to the empress' sons
	Presents that I intend to send them both:
	Come, come; thou'lt do thy message, wilt thou not?

	Ay, with my dagger in their bosoms, grandsire.

	No, boy, not so; I'll teach thee another course.
	Lavinia, come. Marcus, look to my house:
	Lucius and I'll go brave it at the court:
	Ay, marry, will we, sir; and we'll be waited on.

	O heavens, can you hear a good man groan,
	And not relent, or not compassion him?
	Marcus, attend him in his ecstasy,
	That hath more scars of sorrow in his heart
	Than foemen's marks upon his batter'd shield;
	But yet so just that he will not revenge.
	Revenge, ye heavens, for old Andronicus!

	Demetrius, here's the son of Lucius;
	He hath some message to deliver us.

	Ay, some mad message from his mad grandfather.

	My lords, with all the humbleness I may,
	I greet your honours from Andronicus.

	And pray the Roman gods confound you both!

	Gramercy, lovely Lucius: what's the news?

	That you are both decipher'd, that's the news,
	For villains mark'd with rape.--May it please you,
	My grandsire, well advised, hath sent by me
	The goodliest weapons of his armoury
	To gratify your honourable youth,
	The hope of Rome; for so he bade me say;
	And so I do, and with his gifts present
	Your lordships, that, whenever you have need,
	You may be armed and appointed well:
	And so I leave you both:

		   like bloody villains.

	What's here? A scroll; and written round about?
	Let's see;

	'Integer vitae, scelerisque purus,
	Non eget Mauri jaculis, nec arcu.'

	O, 'tis a verse in Horace; I know it well:
	I read it in the grammar long ago.

	Ay, just; a verse in Horace; right, you have it.

	Now, what a thing it is to be an ass!
	Here's no sound jest! the old man hath found their guilt;
	And sends them weapons wrapped about with lines,
	That wound, beyond their feeling, to the quick.
	But were our witty empress well afoot,
	She would applaud Andronicus' conceit:
	But let her rest in her unrest awhile.

	And now, young lords, was't not a happy star
	Led us to Rome, strangers, and more than so,
	Captives, to be advanced to this height?
	It did me good, before the palace gate
	To brave the tribune in his brother's hearing.

	But me more good, to see so great a lord
	Basely insinuate and send us gifts.

	Had he not reason, Lord Demetrius?
	Did you not use his daughter very friendly?

	I would we had a thousand Roman dames
	At such a bay, by turn to serve our lust.

	A charitable wish and full of love.

	Here lacks but your mother for to say amen.

	And that would she for twenty thousand more.

	Come, let us go; and pray to all the gods
	For our beloved mother in her pains.

	Pray to the devils; the gods have given us over.

	Why do the emperor's trumpets flourish thus?

	Belike, for joy the emperor hath a son.

	Soft! who comes here?

	Good morrow, lords:
	O, tell me, did you see Aaron the Moor?

	Well, more or less, or ne'er a whit at all,
	Here Aaron is; and what with Aaron now?

	O gentle Aaron, we are all undone!
	Now help, or woe betide thee evermore!

	Why, what a caterwauling dost thou keep!
	What dost thou wrap and fumble in thine arms?

	O, that which I would hide from heaven's eye,
	Our empress' shame, and stately Rome's disgrace!
	She is deliver'd, lords; she is deliver'd.

	To whom?

	       I mean, she is brought a-bed.

	Well, God give her good rest! What hath he sent her?

	A devil.

	Why, then she is the devil's dam; a joyful issue.

	A joyless, dismal, black, and sorrowful issue:
	Here is the babe, as loathsome as a toad
	Amongst the fairest breeders of our clime:
	The empress sends it thee, thy stamp, thy seal,
	And bids thee christen it with thy dagger's point.

	'Zounds, ye whore! is black so base a hue?
	Sweet blowse, you are a beauteous blossom, sure.

	Villain, what hast thou done?

	That which thou canst not undo.

	Thou hast undone our mother.

	Villain, I have done thy mother.

	And therein, hellish dog, thou hast undone.
	Woe to her chance, and damn'd her loathed choice!
	Accursed the offspring of so foul a fiend!

	It shall not live.

	It shall not die.

	Aaron, it must; the mother wills it so.

	What, must it, nurse? then let no man but I
	Do execution on my flesh and blood.

	I'll broach the tadpole on my rapier's point:
	Nurse, give it me; my sword shall soon dispatch it.

	Sooner this sword shall plough thy bowels up.

	Stay, murderous villains! will you kill your brother?
	Now, by the burning tapers of the sky,
	That shone so brightly when this boy was got,
	He dies upon my scimitar's sharp point
	That touches this my first-born son and heir!
	I tell you, younglings, not Enceladus,
	With all his threatening band of Typhon's brood,
	Nor great Alcides, nor the god of war,
	Shall seize this prey out of his father's hands.
	What, what, ye sanguine, shallow-hearted boys!
	Ye white-limed walls! ye alehouse painted signs!
	Coal-black is better than another hue,
	In that it scorns to bear another hue;
	For all the water in the ocean
	Can never turn the swan's black legs to white,
	Although she lave them hourly in the flood.
	Tell the empress from me, I am of age
	To keep mine own, excuse it how she can.

	Wilt thou betray thy noble mistress thus?

	My mistress is my mistress; this myself,
	The vigour and the picture of my youth:
	This before all the world do I prefer;
	This maugre all the world will I keep safe,
	Or some of you shall smoke for it in Rome.

	By this our mother is forever shamed.

	Rome will despise her for this foul escape.

	The emperor, in his rage, will doom her death.

	I blush to think upon this ignomy.

	Why, there's the privilege your beauty bears:
	Fie, treacherous hue, that will betray with blushing
	The close enacts and counsels of the heart!
	Here's a young lad framed of another leer:
	Look, how the black slave smiles upon the father,
	As who should say 'Old lad, I am thine own.'
	He is your brother, lords, sensibly fed
	Of that self-blood that first gave life to you,
	And from that womb where you imprison'd were
	He is enfranchised and come to light:
	Nay, he is your brother by the surer side,
	Although my seal be stamped in his face.

	Aaron, what shall I say unto the empress?

	Advise thee, Aaron, what is to be done,
	And we will all subscribe to thy advice:
	Save thou the child, so we may all be safe.

	Then sit we down, and let us all consult.
	My son and I will have the wind of you:
	Keep there: now talk at pleasure of your safety.

	How many women saw this child of his?

	Why, so, brave lords! when we join in league,
	I am a lamb: but if you brave the Moor,
	The chafed boar, the mountain lioness,
	The ocean swells not so as Aaron storms.
	But say, again; how many saw the child?

	Cornelia the midwife and myself;
	And no one else but the deliver'd empress.

	The empress, the midwife, and yourself:
	Two may keep counsel when the third's away:
	Go to the empress, tell her this I said.

	Weke, weke! so cries a pig prepared to the spit.

	What mean'st thou, Aaron? wherefore didst thou this?

	O Lord, sir, 'tis a deed of policy:
	Shall she live to betray this guilt of ours,
	A long-tongued babbling gossip? no, lords, no:
	And now be it known to you my full intent.
	Not far, one Muli lives, my countryman;
	His wife but yesternight was brought to bed;
	His child is like to her, fair as you are:
	Go pack with him, and give the mother gold,
	And tell them both the circumstance of all;
	And how by this their child shall be advanced,
	And be received for the emperor's heir,
	And substituted in the place of mine,
	To calm this tempest whirling in the court;
	And let the emperor dandle him for his own.
	Hark ye, lords; ye see I have given her physic,

	And you must needs bestow her funeral;
	The fields are near, and you are gallant grooms:
	This done, see that you take no longer days,
	But send the midwife presently to me.
	The midwife and the nurse well made away,
	Then let the ladies tattle what they please.

	Aaron, I see thou wilt not trust the air
	With secrets.

	                  For this care of Tamora,
	Herself and hers are highly bound to thee.

	Now to the Goths, as swift as swallow flies;
	There to dispose this treasure in mine arms,
	And secretly to greet the empress' friends.
	Come on, you thick lipp'd slave, I'll bear you hence;
	For it is you that puts us to our shifts:
	I'll make you feed on berries and on roots,
	And feed on curds and whey, and suck the goat,
	And cabin in a cave, and bring you up
	To be a warrior, and command a camp.

	Come, Marcus; come, kinsmen; this is the way.
	Sir boy, now let me see your archery;
	Look ye draw home enough, and 'tis there straight.
	Terras Astraea reliquit:
	Be you remember'd, Marcus, she's gone, she's fled.
	Sirs, take you to your tools. You, cousins, shall
	Go sound the ocean, and cast your nets;
	Happily you may catch her in the sea;
	Yet there's as little justice as at land:
	No; Publius and Sempronius, you must do it;
	'Tis you must dig with mattock and with spade,
	And pierce the inmost centre of the earth:
	Then, when you come to Pluto's region,
	I pray you, deliver him this petition;
	Tell him, it is for justice and for aid,
	And that it comes from old Andronicus,
	Shaken with sorrows in ungrateful Rome.
	Ah, Rome! Well, well; I made thee miserable
	What time I threw the people's suffrages
	On him that thus doth tyrannize o'er me.
	Go, get you gone; and pray be careful all,
	And leave you not a man-of-war unsearch'd:
	This wicked emperor may have shipp'd her hence;
	And, kinsmen, then we may go pipe for justice.

	O Publius, is not this a heavy case,
	To see thy noble uncle thus distract?

	Therefore, my lord, it highly us concerns
	By day and night to attend him carefully,
	And feed his humour kindly as we may,
	Till time beget some careful remedy.

	Kinsmen, his sorrows are past remedy.
	Join with the Goths; and with revengeful war
	Take wreak on Rome for this ingratitude,
	And vengeance on the traitor Saturnine.

	Publius, how now! how now, my masters!
	What, have you met with her?

	No, my good lord; but Pluto sends you word,
	If you will have Revenge from hell, you shall:
	Marry, for Justice, she is so employ'd,
	He thinks, with Jove in heaven, or somewhere else,
	So that perforce you must needs stay a time.

	He doth me wrong to feed me with delays.
	I'll dive into the burning lake below,
	And pull her out of Acheron by the heels.
	Marcus, we are but shrubs, no cedars we
	No big-boned men framed of the Cyclops' size;
	But metal, Marcus, steel to the very back,
	Yet wrung with wrongs more than our backs can bear:
	And, sith there's no justice in earth nor hell,
	We will solicit heaven and move the gods
	To send down Justice for to wreak our wrongs.
	Come, to this gear. You are a good archer, Marcus;

	'Ad Jovem,' that's for you: here, 'Ad Apollinem:'
	'Ad Martem,' that's for myself:
	Here, boy, to Pallas: here, to Mercury:
	To Saturn, Caius, not to Saturnine;
	You were as good to shoot against the wind.
	To it, boy! Marcus, loose when I bid.
	Of my word, I have written to effect;
	There's not a god left unsolicited.

	Kinsmen, shoot all your shafts into the court:
	We will afflict the emperor in his pride.

	Now, masters, draw.

		O, well said, Lucius!
	Good boy, in Virgo's lap; give it Pallas.

	My lord, I aim a mile beyond the moon;
	Your letter is with Jupiter by this.

	Ha, ha!
	Publius, Publius, what hast thou done?
	See, see, thou hast shot off one of Taurus' horns.

	This was the sport, my lord: when Publius shot,
	The Bull, being gall'd, gave Aries such a knock
	That down fell both the Ram's horns in the court;
	And who should find them but the empress' villain?
	She laugh'd, and told the Moor he should not choose
	But give them to his master for a present.

	Why, there it goes: God give his lordship joy!

	News, news from heaven! Marcus, the post is come.
	Sirrah, what tidings? have you any letters?
	Shall I have justice? what says Jupiter?

	O, the gibbet-maker! he says that he hath taken
	them down again, for the man must not be hanged till
	the next week.

	But what says Jupiter, I ask thee?

	Alas, sir, I know not Jupiter; I never drank with him
	in all my life.

	Why, villain, art not thou the carrier?

	Ay, of my pigeons, sir; nothing else.

	Why, didst thou not come from heaven?

	From heaven! alas, sir, I never came there     God
	forbid I should be so bold to press to heaven in my
	young days. Why, I am going with my pigeons to the
	tribunal plebs, to take up a matter of brawl
	betwixt my uncle and one of the emperial's men.

	Why, sir, that is as fit as can be to serve for
	your oration; and let him deliver the pigeons to
	the emperor from you.

	Tell me, can you deliver an oration to the emperor
	with a grace?

	Nay, truly, sir, I could never say grace in all my life.

	Sirrah, come hither: make no more ado,
	But give your pigeons to the emperor:
	By me thou shalt have justice at his hands.
	Hold, hold; meanwhile here's money for thy charges.
	Give me pen and ink. Sirrah, can you with a grace
	deliver a supplication?

	Ay, sir.

	Then here is a supplication for you. And when you
	come to him, at the first approach you must kneel,
	then kiss his foot, then deliver up your pigeons, and
	then look for your reward. I'll be at hand, sir; see
	you do it bravely.

	I warrant you, sir, let me alone.

	Sirrah, hast thou a knife? come, let me see it.
	Here, Marcus, fold it in the oration;
	For thou hast made it like an humble suppliant.
	And when thou hast given it the emperor,
	Knock at my door, and tell me what he says.

	God be with you, sir; I will.

	Come, Marcus, let us go. Publius, follow me.

	Why, lords, what wrongs are these! was ever seen
	An emperor in Rome thus overborne,
	Troubled, confronted thus; and, for the extent
	Of egal justice, used in such contempt?
	My lords, you know, as know the mightful gods,
	However these disturbers of our peace
	Buz in the people's ears, there nought hath pass'd,
	But even with law, against the willful sons
	Of old Andronicus. And what an if
	His sorrows have so overwhelm'd his wits,
	Shall we be thus afflicted in his wreaks,
	His fits, his frenzy, and his bitterness?
	And now he writes to heaven for his redress:
	See, here's to Jove, and this to Mercury;
	This to Apollo; this to the god of war;
	Sweet scrolls to fly about the streets of Rome!
	What's this but libelling against the senate,
	And blazoning our injustice every where?
	A goodly humour, is it not, my lords?
	As who would say, in Rome no justice were.
	But if I live, his feigned ecstasies
	Shall be no shelter to these outrages:
	But he and his shall know that justice lives
	In Saturninus' health, whom, if she sleep,
	He'll so awake as she in fury shall
	Cut off the proud'st conspirator that lives.

	My gracious lord, my lovely Saturnine,
	Lord of my life, commander of my thoughts,
	Calm thee, and bear the faults of Titus' age,
	The effects of sorrow for his valiant sons,
	Whose loss hath pierced him deep and scarr'd his heart;
	And rather comfort his distressed plight
	Than prosecute the meanest or the best
	For these contempts.

		Why, thus it shall become
	High-witted Tamora to gloze with all:
	But, Titus, I have touched thee to the quick,
	Thy life-blood out: if Aaron now be wise,
	Then is all safe, the anchor's in the port.

	How now, good fellow! wouldst thou speak with us?

	Yea, forsooth, an your mistership be emperial.

	Empress I am, but yonder sits the emperor.

	'Tis he. God and Saint Stephen give you good den:
	I have brought you a letter and a couple of pigeons here.

	Go, take him away, and hang him presently.

	How much money must I have?

	Come, sirrah, you must be hanged.

	Hanged! by'r lady, then I have brought up a neck to
	a fair end.

	Despiteful and intolerable wrongs!
	Shall I endure this monstrous villany?
	I know from whence this same device proceeds:
	May this be borne?--as if his traitorous sons,
	That died by law for murder of our brother,
	Have by my means been butcher'd wrongfully!
	Go, drag the villain hither by the hair;
	Nor age nor honour shall shape privilege:
	For this proud mock I'll be thy slaughterman;
	Sly frantic wretch, that holp'st to make me great,
	In hope thyself should govern Rome and me.

	What news with thee, AEmilius?

	Arm, arm, my lord;--Rome never had more cause.
	The Goths have gather'd head; and with a power
	high-resolved men, bent to the spoil,
	They hither march amain, under conduct
	Of Lucius, son to old Andronicus;
	Who threats, in course of this revenge, to do
	As much as ever Coriolanus did.

	Is warlike Lucius general of the Goths?
	These tidings nip me, and I hang the head
	As flowers with frost or grass beat down with storms:
	Ay, now begin our sorrows to approach:
	'Tis he the common people love so much;
	Myself hath often over-heard them say,
	When I have walked like a private man,
	That Lucius' banishment was wrongfully,
	And they have wish'd that Lucius were their emperor.

	Why should you fear? is not your city strong?

	Ay, but the citizens favor Lucius,
	And will revolt from me to succor him.

	King, be thy thoughts imperious, like thy name.
	Is the sun dimm'd, that gnats do fly in it?
	The eagle suffers little birds to sing,
	And is not careful what they mean thereby,
	Knowing that with the shadow of his wings
	He can at pleasure stint their melody:
	Even so mayst thou the giddy men of Rome.
	Then cheer thy spirit : for know, thou emperor,
	I will enchant the old Andronicus
	With words more sweet, and yet more dangerous,
	Than baits to fish, or honey-stalks to sheep,
	When as the one is wounded with the bait,
	The other rotted with delicious feed.

	But he will not entreat his son for us.

	If Tamora entreat him, then he will:
	For I can smooth and fill his aged ear
	With golden promises; that, were his heart
	Almost impregnable, his old ears deaf,
	Yet should both ear and heart obey my tongue.

	Go thou before, be our ambassador:
	Say that the emperor requests a parley
	Of warlike Lucius, and appoint the meeting
	Even at his father's house, the old Andronicus.

	AEmilius, do this message honourably:
	And if he stand on hostage for his safety,
	Bid him demand what pledge will please him best.

	Your bidding shall I do effectually.

	Now will I to that old Andronicus;
	And temper him with all the art I have,
	To pluck proud Lucius from the warlike Goths.
	And now, sweet emperor, be blithe again,
	And bury all thy fear in my devices.

	Then go successantly, and plead to him.

	Approved warriors, and my faithful friends,
	I have received letters from great Rome,
	Which signify what hate they bear their emperor
	And how desirous of our sight they are.
	Therefore, great lords, be, as your titles witness,
	Imperious and impatient of your wrongs,
	And wherein Rome hath done you any scath,
	Let him make treble satisfaction.

	Brave slip, sprung from the great Andronicus,
	Whose name was once our terror, now our comfort;
	Whose high exploits and honourable deeds
	Ingrateful Rome requites with foul contempt,
	Be bold in us: we'll follow where thou lead'st,
	Like stinging bees in hottest summer's day
	Led by their master to the flowered fields,
	And be avenged on cursed Tamora.

	And as he saith, so say we all with him.

	I humbly thank him, and I thank you all.
	But who comes here, led by a lusty Goth?

	Renowned Lucius, from our troops I stray'd
	To gaze upon a ruinous monastery;
	And, as I earnestly did fix mine eye
	Upon the wasted building, suddenly
	I heard a child cry underneath a wall.
	I made unto the noise; when soon I heard
	The crying babe controll'd with this discourse:
	'Peace, tawny slave, half me and half thy dam!
	Did not thy hue bewray whose brat thou art,
	Had nature lent thee but thy mother's look,
	Villain, thou mightst have been an emperor:
	But where the bull and cow are both milk-white,
	They never do beget a coal-black calf.
	Peace, villain, peace!'--even thus he rates
	the babe,--
	'For I must bear thee to a trusty Goth;
	Who, when he knows thou art the empress' babe,
	Will hold thee dearly for thy mother's sake.'
	With this, my weapon drawn, I rush'd upon him,
	Surprised him suddenly, and brought him hither,
	To use as you think needful of the man.

	O worthy Goth, this is the incarnate devil
	That robb'd Andronicus of his good hand;
	This is the pearl that pleased your empress' eye,
	And here's the base fruit of his burning lust.
	Say, wall-eyed slave, whither wouldst thou convey
	This growing image of thy fiend-like face?
	Why dost not speak? what, deaf? not a word?
	A halter, soldiers! hang him on this tree.
	And by his side his fruit of bastardy.

	Touch not the boy; he is of royal blood.

	Too like the sire for ever being good.
	First hang the child, that he may see it sprawl;
	A sight to vex the father's soul withal.
	Get me a ladder.

	                  Lucius, save the child,
	And bear it from me to the empress.
	If thou do this, I'll show thee wondrous things,
	That highly may advantage thee to hear:
	If thou wilt not, befall what may befall,
	I'll speak no more but 'Vengeance rot you all!'

	Say on: an if it please me which thou speak'st
	Thy child shall live, and I will see it nourish'd.

	An if it please thee! why, assure thee, Lucius,
	'Twill vex thy soul to hear what I shall speak;
	For I must talk of murders, rapes and massacres,
	Acts of black night, abominable deeds,
	Complots of mischief, treason, villanies
	Ruthful to hear, yet piteously perform'd:
	And this shall all be buried by my death,
	Unless thou swear to me my child shall live.

	Tell on thy mind; I say thy child shall live.

	Swear that he shall, and then I will begin.

	Who should I swear by? thou believest no god:
	That granted, how canst thou believe an oath?

	What if I do not? as, indeed, I do not;
	Yet, for I know thou art religious
	And hast a thing within thee called conscience,
	With twenty popish tricks and ceremonies,
	Which I have seen thee careful to observe,
	Therefore I urge thy oath; for that I know
	An idiot holds his bauble for a god
	And keeps the oath which by that god he swears,
	To that I'll urge him: therefore thou shalt vow
	By that same god, what god soe'er it be,
	That thou adorest and hast in reverence,
	To save my boy, to nourish and bring him up;
	Or else I will discover nought to thee.

	Even by my god I swear to thee I will.

	First know thou, I begot him on the empress.

	O most insatiate and luxurious woman!

	Tut, Lucius, this was but a deed of charity
	To that which thou shalt hear of me anon.
	'Twas her two sons that murder'd Bassianus;
	They cut thy sister's tongue and ravish'd her
	And cut her hands and trimm'd her as thou saw'st.

	O detestable villain! call'st thou that trimming?

	Why, she was wash'd and cut and trimm'd, and 'twas
	Trim sport for them that had the doing of it.

	O barbarous, beastly villains, like thyself!

	Indeed, I was their tutor to instruct them:
	That codding spirit had they from their mother,
	As sure a card as ever won the set;
	That bloody mind, I think, they learn'd of me,
	As true a dog as ever fought at head.
	Well, let my deeds be witness of my worth.
	I train'd thy brethren to that guileful hole
	Where the dead corpse of Bassianus lay:
	I wrote the letter that thy father found
	And hid the gold within the letter mention'd,
	Confederate with the queen and her two sons:
	And what not done, that thou hast cause to rue,
	Wherein I had no stroke of mischief in it?
	I play'd the cheater for thy father's hand,
	And, when I had it, drew myself apart
	And almost broke my heart with extreme laughter:
	I pry'd me through the crevice of a wall
	When, for his hand, he had his two sons' heads;
	Beheld his tears, and laugh'd so heartily,
	That both mine eyes were rainy like to his :
	And when I told the empress of this sport,
	She swooned almost at my pleasing tale,
	And for my tidings gave me twenty kisses.

	What, canst thou say all this, and never blush?

	Ay, like a black dog, as the saying is.

	Art thou not sorry for these heinous deeds?

	Ay, that I had not done a thousand more.
	Even now I curse the day--and yet, I think,
	Few come within the compass of my curse,--
	Wherein I did not some notorious ill,
	As kill a man, or else devise his death,
	Ravish a maid, or plot the way to do it,
	Accuse some innocent and forswear myself,
	Set deadly enmity between two friends,
	Make poor men's cattle break their necks;
	Set fire on barns and hay-stacks in the night,
	And bid the owners quench them with their tears.
	Oft have I digg'd up dead men from their graves,
	And set them upright at their dear friends' doors,
	Even when their sorrows almost were forgot;
	And on their skins, as on the bark of trees,
	Have with my knife carved in Roman letters,
	'Let not your sorrow die, though I am dead.'
	Tut, I have done a thousand dreadful things
	As willingly as one would kill a fly,
	And nothing grieves me heartily indeed
	But that I cannot do ten thousand more.

	Bring down the devil; for he must not die
	So sweet a death as hanging presently.

	If there be devils, would I were a devil,
	To live and burn in everlasting fire,
	So I might have your company in hell,
	But to torment you with my bitter tongue!

	Sirs, stop his mouth, and let him speak no more.

	My lord, there is a messenger from Rome
	Desires to be admitted to your presence.

	Let him come near.

	Welcome, AEmilius	what's the news from Rome?

	Lord Lucius, and you princes of the Goths,
	The Roman emperor greets you all by me;
	And, for he understands you are in arms,
	He craves a parley at your father's house,
	Willing you to demand your hostages,
	And they shall be immediately deliver'd.

	What says our general?

	Aemilius, let the emperor give his pledges
	Unto my father and my uncle Marcus,
	And we will come. March away.

	Thus, in this strange and sad habiliment,
	I will encounter with Andronicus,
	And say I am Revenge, sent from below
	To join with him and right his heinous wrongs.
	Knock at his study, where, they say, he keeps,
	To ruminate strange plots of dire revenge;
	Tell him Revenge is come to join with him,
	And work confusion on his enemies.

	Who doth molest my contemplation?
	Is it your trick to make me ope the door,
	That so my sad decrees may fly away,
	And all my study be to no effect?
	You are deceived: for what I mean to do
	See here in bloody lines I have set down;
	And what is written shall be executed.

	Titus, I am come to talk with thee.

	No, not a word; how can I grace my talk,
	Wanting a hand to give it action?
	Thou hast the odds of me; therefore no more.

	If thou didst know me, thou wouldest talk with me.

	I am not mad; I know thee well enough:
	Witness this wretched stump, witness these crimson lines;
	Witness these trenches made by grief and care,
	Witness the tiring day and heavy night;
	Witness all sorrow, that I know thee well
	For our proud empress, mighty Tamora:
	Is not thy coming for my other hand?

	Know, thou sad man, I am not Tamora;
	She is thy enemy, and I thy friend:
	I am Revenge: sent from the infernal kingdom,
	To ease the gnawing vulture of thy mind,
	By working wreakful vengeance on thy foes.
	Come down, and welcome me to this world's light;
	Confer with me of murder and of death:
	There's not a hollow cave or lurking-place,
	No vast obscurity or misty vale,
	Where bloody murder or detested rape
	Can couch for fear, but I will find them out;
	And in their ears tell them my dreadful name,
	Revenge, which makes the foul offender quake.

	Art thou Revenge? and art thou sent to me,
	To be a torment to mine enemies?

	I am; therefore come down, and welcome me.

	Do me some service, ere I come to thee.
	Lo, by thy side where Rape and Murder stands;
	Now give me some surance that thou art Revenge,
	Stab them, or tear them on thy chariot-wheels;
	And then I'll come and be thy waggoner,
	And whirl along with thee about the globe.
	Provide thee two proper palfreys, black as jet,
	To hale thy vengeful waggon swift away,
	And find out murderers in their guilty caves:
	And when thy car is loaden with their heads,
	I will dismount, and by the waggon-wheel
	Trot, like a servile footman, all day long,
	Even from Hyperion's rising in the east
	Until his very downfall in the sea:
	And day by day I'll do this heavy task,
	So thou destroy Rapine and Murder there.

	These are my ministers, and come with me.

	Are these thy ministers? what are they call'd?

	Rapine and Murder; therefore called so,
	Cause they take vengeance of such kind of men.

	Good Lord, how like the empress' sons they are!
	And you, the empress! but we worldly men
	Have miserable, mad, mistaking eyes.
	O sweet Revenge, now do I come to thee;
	And, if one arm's embracement will content thee,
	I will embrace thee in it by and by.

	This closing with him fits his lunacy
	Whate'er I forge to feed his brain-sick fits,
	Do you uphold and maintain in your speeches,
	For now he firmly takes me for Revenge;
	And, being credulous in this mad thought,
	I'll make him send for Lucius his son;
	And, whilst I at a banquet hold him sure,
	I'll find some cunning practise out of hand,
	To scatter and disperse the giddy Goths,
	Or, at the least, make them his enemies.
	See, here he comes, and I must ply my theme.

	Long have I been forlorn, and all for thee:
	Welcome, dread Fury, to my woful house:
	Rapine and Murder, you are welcome too.
	How like the empress and her sons you are!
	Well are you fitted, had you but a Moor:
	Could not all hell afford you such a devil?
	For well I wot the empress never wags
	But in her company there is a Moor;
	And, would you represent our queen aright,
	It were convenient you had such a devil:
	But welcome, as you are. What shall we do?

	What wouldst thou have us do, Andronicus?

	Show me a murderer, I'll deal with him.

	Show me a villain that hath done a rape,
	And I am sent to be revenged on him.

	Show me a thousand that have done thee wrong,
	And I will be revenged on them all.

	Look round about the wicked streets of Rome;
	And when thou find'st a man that's like thyself.
	Good Murder, stab him; he's a murderer.
	Go thou with him; and when it is thy hap
	To find another that is like to thee,
	Good Rapine, stab him; he's a ravisher.
	Go thou with them; and in the emperor's court
	There is a queen, attended by a Moor;
	Well mayst thou know her by thy own proportion,
	for up and down she doth resemble thee:
	I pray thee, do on them some violent death;
	They have been violent to me and mine.

	Well hast thou lesson'd us; this shall we do.
	But would it please thee, good Andronicus,
	To send for Lucius, thy thrice-valiant son,
	Who leads towards Rome a band of warlike Goths,
	And bid him come and banquet at thy house;
	When he is here, even at thy solemn feast,
	I will bring in the empress and her sons,
	The emperor himself and all thy foes;
	And at thy mercy shalt they stoop and kneel,
	And on them shalt thou ease thy angry heart.
	What says Andronicus to this device?

	Marcus, my brother! 'tis sad Titus calls.

	Go, gentle Marcus, to thy nephew Lucius;
	Thou shalt inquire him out among the Goths:
	Bid him repair to me, and bring with him
	Some of the chiefest princes of the Goths;
	Bid him encamp his soldiers where they are:
	Tell him the emperor and the empress too
	Feast at my house, and he shall feast with them.
	This do thou for my love; and so let him,
	As he regards his aged father's life.

	This will I do, and soon return again.

	Now will I hence about thy business,
	And take my ministers along with me.

	Nay, nay, let Rape and Murder stay with me;
	Or else I'll call my brother back again,
	And cleave to no revenge but Lucius.

	What say you, boys? will you
	bide with him,
	Whiles I go tell my lord the emperor
	How I have govern'd our determined jest?
	Yield to his humour, smooth and speak him fair,
	And tarry with him till I turn again.

	I know them all, though they suppose me mad,
	And will o'erreach them in their own devices:
	A pair of cursed hell-hounds and their dam!

	Madam, depart at pleasure; leave us here.

	Farewell, Andronicus: Revenge now goes
	To lay a complot to betray thy foes.

	I know thou dost; and, sweet Revenge, farewell.

	Tell us, old man, how shall we be employ'd?

	Tut, I have work enough for you to do.
	Publius, come hither, Caius, and Valentine!

	What is your will?

	Know you these two?

	The empress' sons, I take them, Chiron and Demetrius.

	Fie, Publius, fie! thou art too much deceived;
	The one is Murder, Rape is the other's name;
	And therefore bind them, gentle Publius.
	Caius and Valentine, lay hands on them.
	Oft have you heard me wish for such an hour,
	And now I find it; therefore bind them sure,
	And stop their mouths, if they begin to cry.

	Villains, forbear! we are the empress' sons.

	And therefore do we what we are commanded.
	Stop close their mouths, let them not speak a word.
	Is he sure bound? look that you bind them fast.

	Come, come, Lavinia; look, thy foes are bound.
	Sirs, stop their mouths, let them not speak to me;
	But let them hear what fearful words I utter.
	O villains, Chiron and Demetrius!
	Here stands the spring whom you have stain'd with mud,
	This goodly summer with your winter mix'd.
	You kill'd her husband, and for that vile fault
	Two of her brothers were condemn'd to death,
	My hand cut off and made a merry jest;
	Both her sweet hands, her tongue, and that more dear
	Than hands or tongue, her spotless chastity,
	Inhuman traitors, you constrain'd and forced.
	What would you say, if I should let you speak?
	Villains, for shame you could not beg for grace.
	Hark, wretches! how I mean to martyr you.
	This one hand yet is left to cut your throats,
	Whilst that Lavinia 'tween her stumps doth hold
	The basin that receives your guilty blood.
	You know your mother means to feast with me,
	And calls herself Revenge, and thinks me mad:
	Hark, villains! I will grind your bones to dust
	And with your blood and it I'll make a paste,
	And of the paste a coffin I will rear
	And make two pasties of your shameful heads,
	And bid that strumpet, your unhallow'd dam,
	Like to the earth swallow her own increase.
	This is the feast that I have bid her to,
	And this the banquet she shall surfeit on;
	For worse than Philomel you used my daughter,
	And worse than Progne I will be revenged:
	And now prepare your throats. Lavinia, come,

	Receive the blood: and when that they are dead,
	Let me go grind their bones to powder small
	And with this hateful liquor temper it;
	And in that paste let their vile heads be baked.
	Come, come, be every one officious
	To make this banquet; which I wish may prove
	More stern and bloody than the Centaurs' feast.
	So, now bring them in, for I'll play the cook,
	And see them ready 'gainst their mother comes.

	Uncle Marcus, since it is my father's mind
	That I repair to Rome, I am content.

	And ours with thine, befall what fortune will.

	Good uncle, take you in this barbarous Moor,
	This ravenous tiger, this accursed devil;
	Let him receive no sustenance, fetter him
	Till he be brought unto the empress' face,
	For testimony of her foul proceedings:
	And see the ambush of our friends be strong;
	I fear the emperor means no good to us.

	Some devil whisper curses in mine ear,
	And prompt me, that my tongue may utter forth
	The venomous malice of my swelling heart!

	Away, inhuman dog! unhallow'd slave!
	Sirs, help our uncle to convey him in.

	The trumpets show the emperor is at hand.

	What, hath the firmament more suns than one?

	What boots it thee to call thyself a sun?

	Rome's emperor, and nephew, break the parle;
	These quarrels must be quietly debated.
	The feast is ready, which the careful Titus
	Hath ordain'd to an honourable end,
	For peace, for love, for league, and good to Rome:
	Please you, therefore, draw nigh, and take your places.

	Marcus, we will.

	Welcome, my gracious lord; welcome, dread queen;
	Welcome, ye warlike Goths; welcome, Lucius;
	And welcome, all: although the cheer be poor,
	'Twill fill your stomachs; please you eat of it.

	Why art thou thus attired, Andronicus?

	Because I would be sure to have all well,
	To entertain your highness and your empress.

	We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.

	An if your highness knew my heart, you were.
	My lord the emperor, resolve me this:
	Was it well done of rash Virginius
	To slay his daughter with his own right hand,
	Because she was enforced, stain'd, and deflower'd?

	It was, Andronicus.

	Your reason, mighty lord?

	Because the girl should not survive her shame,
	And by her presence still renew his sorrows.

	A reason mighty, strong, and effectual;
	A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant,
	For me, most wretched, to perform the like.
	Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee;

	And, with thy shame, thy father's sorrow die!

	What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind?

	Kill'd her, for whom my tears have made me blind.
	I am as woful as Virginius was,
	And have a thousand times more cause than he
	To do this outrage: and it now is done.

	What, was she ravish'd? tell who did the deed.

	Will't please you eat? will't please your
	highness feed?

	Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus?

	Not I; 'twas Chiron and Demetrius:
	They ravish'd her, and cut away her tongue;
	And they, 'twas they, that did her all this wrong.

	Go fetch them hither to us presently.

	Why, there they are both, baked in that pie;
	Whereof their mother daintily hath fed,
	Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.
	'Tis true, 'tis true; witness my knife's sharp point.

	Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed!

	Can the son's eye behold his father bleed?
	There's meed for meed, death for a deadly deed!

	You sad-faced men, people and sons of Rome,
	By uproar sever'd, like a flight of fowl
	Scatter'd by winds and high tempestuous gusts,
	O, let me teach you how to knit again
	This scatter'd corn into one mutual sheaf,
	These broken limbs again into one body;
	Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself,
	And she whom mighty kingdoms court'sy to,
	Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,
	Do shameful execution on herself.
	But if my frosty signs and chaps of age,
	Grave witnesses of true experience,
	Cannot induce you to attend my words,

	Speak, Rome's dear friend, as erst our ancestor,
	When with his solemn tongue he did discourse
	To love-sick Dido's sad attending ear
	The story of that baleful burning night
	When subtle Greeks surprised King Priam's Troy,
	Tell us what Sinon hath bewitch'd our ears,
	Or who hath brought the fatal engine in
	That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.
	My heart is not compact of flint nor steel;
	Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,
	But floods of tears will drown my oratory,
	And break my utterance, even in the time
	When it should move you to attend me most,
	Lending your kind commiseration.
	Here is a captain, let him tell the tale;
	Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak.

	Then, noble auditory, be it known to you,
	That cursed Chiron and Demetrius
	Were they that murdered our emperor's brother;
	And they it were that ravished our sister:
	For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded;
	Our father's tears despised, and basely cozen'd
	Of that true hand that fought Rome's quarrel out,
	And sent her enemies unto the grave.
	Lastly, myself unkindly banished,
	The gates shut on me, and turn'd weeping out,
	To beg relief among Rome's enemies:
	Who drown'd their enmity in my true tears.
	And oped their arms to embrace me as a friend.
	I am the turned forth, be it known to you,
	That have preserved her welfare in my blood;
	And from her bosom took the enemy's point,
	Sheathing the steel in my adventurous body.
	Alas, you know I am no vaunter, I;
	My scars can witness, dumb although they are,
	That my report is just and full of truth.
	But, soft! methinks I do digress too much,
	Citing my worthless praise: O, pardon me;
	For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.

	Now is my turn to speak. Behold this child:

	Of this was Tamora delivered;
	The issue of an irreligious Moor,
	Chief architect and plotter of these woes:
	The villain is alive in Titus' house,
	And as he is, to witness this is true.
	Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge
	These wrongs, unspeakable, past patience,
	Or more than any living man could bear.
	Now you have heard the truth, what say you, Romans?
	Have we done aught amiss,--show us wherein,
	And, from the place where you behold us now,
	The poor remainder of Andronici
	Will, hand in hand, all headlong cast us down.
	And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains,
	And make a mutual closure of our house.
	Speak, Romans, speak; and if you say we shall,
	Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.

	Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome,
	And bring our emperor gently in thy hand,
	Lucius our emperor; for well I know
	The common voice do cry it shall be so.

	Lucius, all hail, Rome's royal emperor!

	Go, go into old Titus' sorrowful house,

	And hither hale that misbelieving Moor,
	To be adjudged some direful slaughtering death,
	As punishment for his most wicked life.

	Lucius, all hail, Rome's gracious governor!

	Thanks, gentle Romans: may I govern so,
	To heal Rome's harms, and wipe away her woe!
	But, gentle people, give me aim awhile,
	For nature puts me to a heavy task:
	Stand all aloof: but, uncle, draw you near,
	To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk.
	O, take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips,

	These sorrowful drops upon thy blood-stain'd face,
	The last true duties of thy noble son!

	Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,
	Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips:
	O were the sum of these that I should pay
	Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them!

	Come hither, boy; come, come, and learn of us
	To melt in showers: thy grandsire loved thee well:
	Many a time he danced thee on his knee,
	Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow:
	Many a matter hath he told to thee,
	Meet and agreeing with thine infancy;
	In that respect, then, like a loving child,
	Shed yet some small drops from thy tender spring,
	Because kind nature doth require it so:
	Friends should associate friends in grief and woe:
	Bid him farewell; commit him to the grave;
	Do him that kindness, and take leave of him.

	O grandsire, grandsire! even with all my heart
	Would I were dead, so you did live again!
	O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping;
	My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth.

	You sad Andronici, have done with woes:
	Give sentence on this execrable wretch,
	That hath been breeder of these dire events.

	Set him breast-deep in earth, and famish him;
	There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food;
	If any one relieves or pities him,
	For the offence he dies. This is our doom:
	Some stay to see him fasten'd in the earth.

	O, why should wrath be mute, and fury dumb?
	I am no baby, I, that with base prayers
	I should repent the evils I have done:
	Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did
	Would I perform, if I might have my will;
	If one good deed in all my life I did,
	I do repent it from my very soul.

	Some loving friends convey the emperor hence,
	And give him burial in his father's grave:
	My father and Lavinia shall forthwith
	Be closed in our household's monument.
	As for that heinous tiger, Tamora,
	No funeral rite, nor man m mourning weeds,
	No mournful bell shall ring her burial;
	But throw her forth to beasts and birds of prey:
	Her life was beast-like, and devoid of pity;
	And, being so, shall have like want of pity.
	See justice done on Aaron, that damn'd Moor,
	By whom our heavy haps had their beginning:
	Then, afterwards, to order well the state,
	That like events may ne'er it ruinate.
